news, federal-politics,

prime minister scott morrison's victory appeared to come from nowhere but in reality had been months in the making. from the critical budget reset, to the creation of policy war rooms, watertight whatsapp groups and games of thrones-themed memes, the liberals outgunned labor, especially in the left's native online habitat. the sydney morning herald and the age have spoken to multiple sources, including those at the highest levels of coalition campaign headquarters, or cchq, to learn how the liberals pulled off last week's unexpected win. the rejuvenation began with the appointment of 41-year old andrew hirst as federal director of the liberal party in june 2017. when he first entered his office, on the second floor of the quaint 1960s red-brick r.g. menzies house, just a five-minute walk from parliament in canberra, the quietly spoken hirst was staring at a blank canvas. he set about filling it, hiring simon berger, who was then working for cabinet minister michaelia cash. the 44-year-old had worked on every campaign since 1993, bar 2010. mark textor, the liberal's long-time pollster had swapped the political frontline for farming. but the tentacles of the firm he co-founded, the crosby textor group (ct), run deep within the party. hirst, who had risen to the position of deputy chief of staff to former prime minister tony abbott before returning to ct after his ousting, began calling some old colleagues. from washington, he called home ct's isaac levido, whom he appointed to work alongside berger as co-deputy director. "berge" and levido, 33, had not seen each other since their young liberals days but the trio quickly became a "tight troika", dividing responsibility for stakeholder management, campaign mechanics and messaging. ct's research would prove critical, accurately showing a pathway to a coalition victory, in spite of all the major published polls calling the election for labor. the fieldwork was carried out by ct's australian research and campaigns business: c|t rsr. a new company recruit, michael turner, led the fieldwork and analysis, while michael brooks was brought out from london and embedded in cchq to provide strategic advice. brooks was working with familiar faces in brisbane. sean topham, a 28-year-old digital whiz from auckland and co-founder of digital advisory firm topham guerin had worked with brooks on former british prime minister david cameron's win in 2015. finally, hirst hired adelaide-based ad agency kwp! he was ready. now the question was where to base the team. the decision to send them to queensland, well out of the "canberra bubble" at the suggestion of nationals federal director ben hindmarsh, was as deliberate as it was strategic. "there's benefit being in a capital city where there's a bunch of marginal seats - you're picking up the same newspapers, you're listening to the same radio, you're watching the same tv at night," hirst says. "you're also closer to key seats so if someone needs to get to a key seat to deal with an issue, it's much easier." the liberals held all their seats in queensland and picked up herbert and longman, which they had lost less than 12 months prior in a byelection. canberra, where headquarters was based in 2016, by comparison has just one marginal seat nearby - eden-monaro. heading north also made for more frontbench foot traffic through cchq, with about 20 ministers, including the prime minister, detouring after campaign stops over the five-week election lead-up. "even if you just pause for 15 minutes to rev up the troops, it's great to have the ministers come through, talk to key staff and see how things are operating," hirst says. the campaign was underway well before the starter's gun fired in april. with the advantage of knowing the election date months in advance, the liberals set up policy war rooms comprising mps and staff. both offensive and defensive groups were established to war-game the coalition's perceived "liabilities", including health and education, and others formed to take on labor's tax changes. the group that worked on negative gearing began holding forums with real estate agents and mortgage brokers around the country. the gatherings could be small, maybe 20 people, but each person in the room was considered a local "influencer"; not a social media influencer with thousands of bought fake followers, but people working in the industry with word-of-mouth networks. treasurer josh frydenberg spent the summer penning opinion piece after opinion piece, placing the so-called retiree tax and negative gearing on the agenda so by the time of the budget, in which the coalition promised a return to surplus, the public was ready to judge the government on its economic message. while the press mocked the idea of a budget bounce in the polls, the liberals' internal research showed it had given them a boost. morrison was telling business figures over dinner he was convinced he could win the election he was about to call. borrowing from his mentor, former federal liberal party director brian loughnane, hirst set in motion the "train tracks" method - identify your message and pursue it relentlessly. shadow treasurer chris bowen's proposed changes to franking credits and negative gearing were an easy target. what the press gallery praised as "reform", the liberals painted as a risk to voters' hip pocket, required only because labor couldn't manage money. its message was summed up by the phrase "the bill you can't afford", which hirst says was work-shopped by the team. it was vintage crosby textor. berger boosted the liberals' spending on outdoor advertising, pasting the line over an unflattering photograph of opposition leader bill shorten on trucks, billboards and buses across the country. by the last two weeks of the campaign, it was popping up unprompted in focus groups. as one labor mp put it: "it was lethal in casting bill shorten as our mark latham." upwards of 15 whatsapp groups were formed to coordinate campaign messaging and tactics. the "tactics and media" group would begin pinging with messages at 5.30 in the morning, which continued until 11.30 at night. the pm and cchq leadership would have an initial phone hook-up at 6am and the bulk of staff would arrive around 7am, in time for the first of the twice-daily meetings at 7.20am. hirst would already have been hitting the phones for hours. staff were encouraged to propose ideas and raise any complaints but not second-guess each other's jobs. hirst prided himself on making quick decisions and delegated when he could. one insider who worked on coalition's 2016 campaign says hirst's approach was in stark contrast to the "14 layers of bureaucracy" approach adopted by former campaign director tony nutt, who wanted to approve everything, often holding things up for crucial hours. the state directors' hook-up was at 7.30am. while each was given plenty of latitude to localise their communications, their daily check-ins meant the overall campaign stayed on message. labor had bested the liberals online at every previous election. under nutt, the liberals had barely experimented with social media and digital campaigning. "if nutt didn't know about it, it didn't need to be known," one cchq veteran says. "but with hirsty, he doesn't think he knows it all and he knows he's not tech savvy, so he was happy to defer." topham and ben guerin had worked on campaigns for britain's cameron, malcolm turnbull and new zealand's john key before founding topham guerin. since then, they'd worked on bill english's unsuccessful nz campaign in 2017 but helped the liberals to victory in nsw and south australia. the friendly, personal video they produced about nsw premier gladys berejiklian went on to be her highest-performing facebook post of the state campaign, with more than 115,000 views and 762 shares. trent hasson, a 32-year-old government staffer, led the coalition's social team with the support of topham, who'd been embedded with the party since 2018. at the core of their strategy was video, coinciding with a change to facebook's algorithm to favour video posts. "my vision", the morrison version of the berejiklian video, which ends with shots of him surrounded by his two girls and wife jenny, has had 1.5 million views since its april release. but it wasn't all slick. cchq deliberately turned out tacky content it dubbed boomer memes. these would often riff off a well-known movie or television show but always contain a serious message about shorten being an economic risk. every monday night, for instance, they would release a new game of thrones meme to coincide with the airing of the cult show's final season. "we'd make them really basic and deliberately lame because they'd get shares and lift our reach - that made our reach for the harder political messages higher," one campaign staffer says. between hasson and topham, the liberals were leaving labor in their wake on social media and shorten knew it. early in the campaign, the labor leader was demanding to know from hirst's opposite number - noah carroll - where on earth the opposition's video content was. the metrics confirmed shorten's concerns. morrison and shorten's facebook pages shared a similar number of videos throughout the campaign but morrison's attracted more than double the views. his page attracted 25 per cent more engagements than shorten's and the liberals' own facebook page outperformed labor's 2:1. on instagram, morrison received 112,000 likes and comments compared with shorten's 71,000 throughout the campaign. one senior cchq figure says re-engaging the base was also key to the coalition's success on social media. at the end of 2018, liberal supporters had been fighting each other online about the state of the party. warning them of the economic risks posed by shorten was the tonic the coalition used to soothe its angry base. by the end of the election, the liberals' volunteer and membership base had recovered. the importance of this cannot be underestimated. unlike the left-wing parties, which have the unions and activist group getup at their disposal, the coalition relies mostly on volunteers with day jobs. also critical was the sense of urgency. this election, the liberals were producing content exploiting any labor mistakes within hours. when labor announced its electric cars policy, flyers denouncing "labor's car tax" that had been produced at cchq in brisbane were being handed out in shopping centre car parks and railway stations the next morning across the country. using micro-targeting, the liberals were able to push the same message to car-loving facebook groups. but the widespread view across cchq is that their good campaign would have gone nowhere without their leading man - scott morrison. the footy-loving, plain-speaking evangelical churchgoer turned out to be a formidable campaigner who genuinely drew energy from being out on the road and sharing beers with punters. a former nsw liberal party director himself, morrison resisted the temptation to micro-manage and instead trusted hirst and his team to execute the campaign, something many leaders struggle with. morrison was also happy to let others front his campaign if the research showed they were more popular. often this was his wife, or the liberal premiers in nsw and tasmania. morrison's win has not only buoyed a party that was not long ago on the brink of splitting, but has demonstrated that the liberal party's machine, once creaking under the demands of modern campaigning, is now a well-oiled, winning operation.

https://nnimgt-a.akamaihd.net/transform/v1/crop/frm/3buuzmfahrhlyx9rfcubpq5/3444061d-617e-4fdf-b967-8c8f8a023064.png/r1_0_619_349_w1200_h678_fmax.jpg

the inside story of how the liberals beat labor at its own game latika bourke facebook share

twitter tweet

email

whatsappnews, federal-politics,

when anthony albanese became became assistant secretary of nsw labor in 1989, factional bosses from the right were so displeased they waited for him to go on holiday and kicked him out of his corner office, reassembling it in the middle of the floor. albanese and a crew of manufacturing union members had to drag everything back to its place when he returned. today, the once-towering nsw right faction has swung what remains of its weight behind the 56-year-old left-winger to salvage their party from the despair of a bruising, humiliating defeat the party did not see coming. frontbenchers who thought they'd be in canberra next week to select the artwork for their ministerial offices will instead shuffle into the opposition's meeting room - the same one they've known for six years - to confirm albanese as their new leader and pick his deputy. defence spokesman richard marles is the leading contender, although financial services spokeswoman clare o'neil, also of the victorian right, is in the running. frontbench roles will change, with victorian veteran kim carr on the way out and former nsw premier kristina keneally entering. below deck, the tectonic plates of the alp are shifting. accustomed to losing, the left will have one of its fiercest combatants in the top job. on the present configuration, it will also control the party's national executive. "every fantasy of an old-time left-winger is finally happening," said one factional enthusiast. "we've been speculating for decades about what it would look like." lest anyone start waving the red flag and singing l'internationale, nsw right sources say conversations are already underway about ways to preserve the current balance of power on national executive and deny the left a majority. furthermore, albanese has no intention of abusing his newfound numerical advantage. he has marked the start of his tenure with a firm indication he believes the party's success relies on ending the class war rhetoric and embracing business as a partner, not an enemy. labor must be about growing the pie, not just carving it up differently. it is the same position he staked out just prior to the super saturday byelections, when bill shorten's leadership was precarious and would likely not have survived the loss of a seat. in the recent past, labor leaders from the left have bitterly disappointed their own faction. "the risk is we've got a [luke] foley or a [julia] gillard on our hands here," said one observer. as labor mps start to recover from the shock of losing a "gimme" election, despondency is starting to morph into a stark evaluation of where things went wrong and how they might be rectified. naturally, that also involves putting some markers on the ground. andrew giles, from the victorian left, says it would be a mistake to conclude labor needs to move to the right as a response the coalition's victory. "i certainly don't accept that's the lesson from the election," he says. but he agrees with albanese's inclination to ditch the "us and them" rhetoric and work closely with employers. "it's obviously a very different emphasis [to bill shorten]," giles says. "but i don't think that means a shift to the right, i think it's reflecting on where community sentiment is at." as well as reorienting labor's broader economic narrative, albanese will need to deal with policies that failed to resonate at best and cost the party seats at worst. the plan to abolish franking credits is a shining example - though albanese has so far hinted at improving the policy rather than junking it entirely. he will also need to deal with the party's identity crises on multiple fronts. there is "the queensland challenge", as labor senator anthony chisholm puts it. there is the fact that hunter, a blue collar labor seat since 1910, is now marginal after sitting mp joel fitzgibbon copped a 14 per cent swing against him and one nation won 22 per cent of the primary vote. mr fitzgibbon went on the attack this week, lamenting the party's equivocation on the adani mine and its fixation on electric cars and renewable energy above coal and manufacturing jobs. he says the party should now move to a clear position in support of opening up the galilee basin in central queensland. "we should unequivocally state our support for any project which is able to pass reasonable, science-based environmental tests," he tells the sydney morning herald and the age. "we are a party that supports coal mining and the export of coal. how can we not say we support any new coal mine that passes that test?" fitzgibbon says labor needs to be realistic about the politics of coal and climate change, and is encouraged by environment spokesman tony burke's call to abandon a market-based solution for direct intervention to reduce emissions. "a lot of australians are still sceptical about climate change," fitzgibbon says. "unless they hear both major political parties saying action is necessary, you won't get a sufficient number of people agreeing something must be done. we need to find something that we can support and our political opponents will have no choice but to support." then there is the party's "real problem" with religious voters in the suburbs, a point shadow treasurer chris bowen raised when he pulled out of the leadership race this week. he was swiftly backed up by tony burke, who said labor was good at standing up against racism but had fallen short when it came to defending people of faith against ridicule and vilification. both men hold seats in multicultural western sydney with a high population of islamic and catholic residents. albanese's inner west electorate contains a fair share of greek orthodox and maronite christians. his opponent, scott morrison, looks the part when it comes to religious freedom. he is a hard core social conservative who attends a pentacostal church with his nuclear family. albanese, a lapsed catholic, recently split with his wife, former nsw deputy premier carmel tebbutt. the incoming labor leader's guiding principle on religious issues is "respect" for different views. he believes it was a mistake for the party to move towards binding in favour of same-sex marriage, rather than continuing with a conscience vote, because it would have said to mps and members they did not belong in labor if they had a different view on marriage. "you shouldn't put someone in a position of choosing between the faith that they genuinely hold, and the love that they have for the labor party," albanese said this week. that is the approach the opposition leader will take to further debates on religious freedom that crop up in the next parliament - as they surely will.

https://nnimgt-a.akamaihd.net/transform/v1/crop/frm/3buuzmfahrhlyx9rfcubpq5/340c56be-8bdf-4f42-b195-73edeef96f16.jpg/r2_0_618_348_w1200_h678_fmax.jpg

just a jump to the left, and then a step to the right: the challenges facing anthony albanese michael koziol facebook share

twitter tweet

email

whatsapp

news, federal-politics, andrew leigh, greens, federal eelction, auspol, election

re-elected fenner mp andrew leigh has openly attacked the campaign strategy of the greens in the recent federal election, saying they targeted progressive seats rather than those held by the coalition in the act. while the greens increased their vote in the senate in the act, dr leigh criticised the party's tactics of going after safe labor-held seats such as canberra instead of trying to unseat liberal senator zed seselja. "they claim to attempt to pursue progressive ends but in fact they're not directing their attention to defeating conservatives," dr leigh said. "the liberals were vulnerable because they had one of the most right-wing senators in one of the most progressive jurisdictions in australia, and to unseat zed would have been in the interest of the campaign for stronger progressives. "their strategy is just misguided." labor comfortably won all three lower house seats in the act, with a 4 per cent swing to alicia payne in the seat of canberra, while the greens' tim hollo received a 4 per cent swing in the party's primary vote. the greens recorded their biggest share of the primary vote in canberra's inner north. in the upper house, the greens received 17.6 per cent of the primary vote - a swing of almost 1.5 per cent. dr leigh said the greens targeting safe labor seats in inner-city areas was counterproductive. "i want the greens to look at the bigger picture," he said. "they chose to have [lower house candidate] tim hollo in a more prominent position in campaigning than [lead senate candidate] penny kyburz. "this isn't a criticism of penny or tim, it's a criticism of the greens organisation and the way they operate." ms kyburz has hit back at the claims of a "misguided strategy", saying plenty of effort was made at targeting the liberal-held senate seat. she said agreement between the two parties was critical going forward into the new parliament. "we all wanted a change of government and we were working towards that goal," ms kyburz said. "we recommended preferences to labor above the liberals in all three house seats and we recommended that greens voters give labor their second preferences in the senate. "in future elections, labor will need to work with the greens to replace zed and hold off the canberra liberals." the greens targeted several liberal-held seats during the campaign, including kooyong, held by treasurer josh frydenberg, and higgins in victoria.

https://nnimgt-a.akamaihd.net/transform/v1/crop/frm/fdcx/doc75ek86csmuc1fris91z4.jpg/r858_799_5380_3354_w1200_h678_fmax.jpgnews, federal-politics,

anthony albanese is not mucking around. labor has just suffered a disorienting election loss, but albanese has been out every day this week pressing his case for leadership of the party. indeed, the election result was barely 12 hours old when the senior labor frontbencher officially launched his leadership bid on sunday. so far, he has seen off about five potential challengers - who have been variously spooked by his popular and caucus support - and now looks set to be elected unopposed. there have been some eyebrows raised within labor about how quickly albanese got out of the blocks. but bear in mind, this is a man who kept his leadership ambitions dutifully on ice for six long years. after bill shorten pipped him to the post in 2013, albanese retreated to the infrastructure and tourism portfolios with barely a peep. he did not do a kevin rudd or a tony abbott and make trouble from within. albanese supporters say he put his hand up for the leadership so quickly and definitively because of his fierce love for the party and determination to beat the coalition. "albanese bleeds labor," victorian labor mp andrew giles says. (albanese will tell anyone who listens how much he loves "fighting tories".) those close to albanese, 56, also say he is more than qualified to take on the role of labor leader. first elected to parliament in 1996, he's been on the frontbench since 1998. he has been minister for infrastructure, transport and regional development. during rudd's 2013 return as prime minister, albanese was also, briefly, deputy prime minister. backing albanese this week, labor frontbencher penny wong described him as "the outstanding parliamentarian of our generation". labor insiders are particularly excited about albanese's parliamentary talents. he was leader of the house (the government's chief parliamentary strategist) throughout the rudd-gillard years, including the bumpy days of minority government. he is well known for his capacity to make deals and maintain different relationships and is credited as one of the people who kept julia gillard's precarious government together. his political survival skills are also evidenced by the fact that he managed to keep his prestigious cabinet and parliamentary jobs when gillard toppled rudd, and then won a promotion when rudd toppled gillard. as labor seeks to rebuild itself in the eyes of voters, albanese also has a strong personal story to tell. "i'm the product of a single mum," he said earlier this week. albanese is proud of the fact he was raised by his mother, maryanne, in public housing in sydney's inner west. away from the politics and procedural stuff, labor is also pinning its hopes on albanese's popularity. while shorten always struggled to connect with voters, "albo" has long enjoyed a cult following. several years ago, a photo of albanese as a university student was turned into a "hot albo" meme. he has guest programmed rage (with appropriately hip choices like the smiths, pj harvey and nick cave), performed as a dj and had a craft beer created in his name. since announcing his candidacy, albanese has talked of his ability to speak to people in pubs, schools and boardrooms. he is well known in canberra for his sense of humour. asked what working for albanese would be like, nsw labor mp and left faction colleague stephen jones does not miss a beat. "i think it's going to be a lot of fun. he's unrelenting. he's also a lot of fun."

https://nnimgt-a.akamaihd.net/transform/v1/crop/frm/fdcx/doc75gikhoo80p14ocy4hrl.jpg/r711_216_3970_2057_w1200_h678_fmax.jpgelection 2019: canberra results show the act is safe as houses for labor despite national swing to coalition

updated

as australia watched on with bated breath and scott morrison defied years of opinion polls and public expectations, the results for the national capital were severely lacking in suspense.

while canberra will soon be a part-time home to 222 members of the 46th parliament, the five federal politicians who live in the city full time have practically walked it home.

the act may have been created specifically to host fierce debates from across the political spectrum, but the territory itself is one of the most politically homogenous regions in the country — and one of the most predictable.

just over the border in new south wales, it came down to the wire in the former bellwether seat of eden monaro.

with 75 per cent of the vote counted labor's mike kelly has only just held onto his seat from liberal political newcomer fiona kotvojs.

but it was a different story in canberra.

even before the count began the act's three lower house seats canberra, fenner and bean were all expected to go labor's way, with margins as high as 12.9 per cent.

with about 80 per cent of the vote counted fenner and bean have seen a slight swing to the liberals.

and, while the greens had vague hope of claiming the central seat of canberra, ultimately voters reaffirmed its status as the safest seat in the territory with a 3 per cent swing to labor.

with first preferences counted, labor's katy gallagher is set to take out one of the act's senate seats and the liberals' zed seselja looks safe to win the other, despite pockets of discontent over his backing of peter dutton in the failed leadership coup.

but it is hardly a surprising result.

the heart of the nation continues to bleed red

labor has held power continuously since 2001 at a territory level — the stanhope-gallagher-barr government is just a few months away from being allowed into the mooseheads nightclub.

similarly the act's federal house of reps seats have not been touched by liberal fingers since the 1990s — and even then the member, brendan smyth, was propelled in through a by-election amid voter dissatisfaction with the keating government and the departing member ros kelly.

he won a by-election in 1995 but his seat was swiftly returned to labor just 13 months later, even amid a swing to the coalition that saw john howard thrust into office.

what makes a safe seat safe?

a common jab at canberra's status as a labor town is that self-interested public servants flock to a party that is often seen as being softer on public sector jobs and conditions.

but political scientist john warhurst said that was just one of many factors pushing the capital a little to the left.

"in generalities urban people are more likely to vote labor than rural australians, so that's one characteristic," he said.

"higher academic qualifications tend to be more labor than coalition — and the act would have a high percentage of those with a university education and perhaps even a postgraduate university education.

"the act also tends to be more secular than many other parts of the country, and churchgoers tend to be more conservative than those who are not regular churchgoers or those who are not believers at all."

so even though the territory's somewhat government-reliant workforce may play some role in its voting habits, there is more nuance than immediate self interest.

"it's certainly not the whole story as far as public servants are concerned," professor warhurst said.

"you're in a job where you're a government servant, and therefore you presumably believe that government has a role in a mixed economy like australia.

"it's a bit of values as well as self interest, and that's probably a good way of approaching a number of these social characteristics."

with all this in mind, you hardly needed a degree in divination to read the tea leaves on this one.

meet your new (and slightly less new) representatives

a growing population, resulting in a third seat for the act, was not enough to stem the tide of the red sea.

the only patch of blue, though still expected, lies with liberal zed seselja — who looks on track to re-enter the senate for a third term after moving to the house on the hill following his role as opposition leader in the act legislative assembly.

no stranger to him is labor senator-elect katy gallagher, who was act chief minister until 2014, when she followed mr seselja into the senate.

but she was temporarily pushed out of federal politics after her dual british citizenship was revealed.

moving to the lower house, andrew leigh has been elected in the northern seat of fenner. he has been the member of parliament since 2010 — before that he was an academic and economist.

the central seat of canberra will be represented by alicia payne — the only completely fresh face entering parliament — though she has spent time there before as an adviser to labor frontbenchers.

in the southern electorate of bean david smith has been elected.

mr smith was something of an accidental politician. when the aforementioned senator gallagher was booted under section 44, he was pulled from relative obscurity to fill her seat.

at the 2016 election the abc even did a story about how incredibly unlikely it was he would ever be elected.

two years later he was being dragged into the red room.

just goes to show, even foregone conclusions can mask unpredictable twists — who knows what the 46th parliament will hold?

topics: federal-elections, government-and-politics, elections, canberra-2600, act, australia

first posted