vardø is a small fishing village on a little island off norway’s coast in the barents sea. a huge military radar facility forms its skyline. in clear weather, if you look east across the water, you can see the shoreline of russia’s fishermen peninsula, a northern appendix of the kola peninsula.

officially, the intelligence service operating the facility has never said the word “russia” when explaining what the radars in vardø are looking for.

russia’s foreign ministry, though, has a clear view on the purpose of the globus radar.

“the station is located just 50 kilometers from the border with russia, served by norwegian military intelligence. it’s no secret that the information it receives is transmitted to the united states,” foreign ministry spokeswoman maria zakharova said during a recent press briefing.

“it seems obvious to me that military preparations near russian or any other borders cannot be ignored by us or other countries,” foreign ministry spokeswoman maria zakharova said when asked about the new radar currently being installed in vardø.

“we presume that we will take repose measures to ensure our own security,” she said. a transcript of the press briefing is published on the portal of the foreign ministry.the move was a response to the russian entities' transfer of restricted goods, services and technologies to the countries in violation of a u.s. law, a state department notification posted on the u.s. government’s federal register said tuesday.

the united states has sanctioned two russian arms manufacturers and a missile training center for allegedly violating international arms control restrictions on exports to iran, north korea and syria.

the new sanctions target the gatchina surface-to-air missile training academy, the high-precision weapons maker instrument design bureau (kbp) tula and the moscow machine building plant avangard. avangard manufactures missiles for russia’s s-400 and s-300 systems.

russia’s foreign ministry accused washington of “rushing to cross out the positive nature” of u.s. state secretary mike pompeo’s recent visit for talks with president vladimir putin.

“this is clearly about getting even for [russia’s] help in reinforcing the syrian air defense, which the u.s. and some of its partners have repeatedly tried to test,” the ministry said in a statement.

first imposed by the u.s. in 2000 and updated in 2006, the iran, north korea and syria nonproliferation act (inksna) prohibits the transfer of goods, services and technologies restricted under international arms control agreements to iran, north korea and syria.

the sanctions went into effect on may 14 and will expire in two years if not extended, the state department notification in the federal register said. they prevent any u.s. companies or government agencies from doing business with the sanctioned russian arms entities.

kbp had been sanctioned for the same violations in 2015, and the gatchina surface-to-air missile training center in 2018. russia’s state-owned arms exporter rosoboronexport was sanctioned over alleged inksna violations in 2015.

other russian entities targeted by the 2015 sanctions include the fighter jet manufacturer mig, rocket and missile design bureau npo mashinostroyenia, and night-vision optics maker katod.— the entire politics desk of the kommersant business newspaper, 11 people in total, handed in their resignations this week. the mass departure was a protest against a decision by the editor in chief and the oligarch owner to fire two journalists for a scoop in april. we speak with one of the kommersant reporters who was fired for the scoop, and to russian journalist alexei kovalev about how this latest incident fits into the worsening media landscape in russia.

— on april 25, russia halted oil flows through the druzhba pipeline to eastern europe and germany because the deliveries had been contaminated with organic chloride, leading to frictions between russia, belarus and the west. we speak to bloomberg reporter jake rudnitsky to discuss the fallout.

from russia with news is hosted by jonathan brown and produced by pjotr sauer. the episode was recorded and edited at cm records studio in central moscow.

go deeper:

russian journalists quit en masse as censorship scandal hits

how one village on the volga sowed chaos in europe’s oil market

this week's meanwhile: climber who shut down eiffel tower was russian – reports“a mountain has given birth to a mouse. the ‘russian affair’ falls to pieces before our eyes.”

so pronounced the russian news site gazeta.ru, as word of the completed mueller report swept around the world.

thus far, official russian response to the mueller findings has been scornful. leaders are taking the conclusions of u.s. attorney general william barr – that the report shows no collusion between the kremlin and u.s. president donald trump – as a chance to dismiss all claims of russian interference in the 2016 u.s. presidential election.

the mueller investigation in fact confirms that russian government agents did meddle in u.s. politics, resulting in the 2018 indictments of 25 russians. but russian agencies like the ministry of foreign affairs call charges of covert information warfare “far-fetched lies.”

“it’s hard to find a black cat in a dark room, especially if it’s not there,” scoffed kremlin spokesman dmitry peskov. (the same phrase was used by russia’s defense minister in 2014, to deny the presence of russian troops in ukraine – a fact the government later acknowledged to be true.)

kremlin pundits may be claiming trump’s victory as russia’s victory. but that doesn’t mean they are showing him the same sympathy they did two years ago, when the investigation into the president and his election committee began.

today, most russian media outlets are holding up the mueller story as just another example of american dysfunction. trump is cast as a symptom of larger problems, rather than as the man who might solve them.

dysfunctional america

those alleged “larger problems” are emphasized in what, for russia, has been a much bigger news story in recent days. somber russian journalists commemorated the 20th anniversary of nato’s decision to bomb yugoslavia for its suppression of the albanian independence movement in kosovo.

their reports cast nato’s operation allied force as a u.s-led attempt at “regime change.” the bombing campaign “failed to destroy most military targets, but was highly effective in terms of killing civilians,” read one report on rt’s sunday evening news show, “the weekly.”

as a historian of soviet and post-soviet russia, i was living in moscow in 1999 when those nato airstrikes began. my apartment, as luck would have it, was directly across the street from archnationalist vladimir zhirinovsky’s campaign headquarters, where activists urged russians to go to belgrade to fight “for their slavic brethren” in a “world war three” against america – all as the theme from “the godfather” blared in the background.

back then, however, such anti-western rhetoric was limited to a fringe political party.

today, in contrast, it is promoted by the status quo. monday, russian sen. aleksei pushkov tweeted that the mueller investigation was “a humiliation for the usa and its political elites.” a typical comment posted in response read: “the whole country is full of idiots.”

“the word ‘conspiracy’ has become one of the most popular in the u.s. political lexicon,” noted kremlin newspaper russian gazette, in an article titled “mueller and the void.”

dysfunctional media

at the same time, russian media is playing up the political divisions in the u.s. they suggest that the mueller report will stoke rather than heal them.

rt sent out a “breaking news” alert sunday that read “trump is still bad – media and democrats refuse to swallow mueller’s red pill, grasp at obstruction straw.”

in line with many tabloid publications around the world, russian news also immediately emphasized the calls for “retaliation” and “punishment” coming from trump supporters.

the worst scorn, however, was reserved for western journalists who, again to quote rt, were struggling to “spin the unspinnable,” after having heavily promoted the collusion story.

while many u.s. media outlets are still fighting to keep the possibility of a cover-up alive, rt wrote on sunday, “the bbc has passed into the ‘acceptance’ stage of grieving.”

all such coverage highlights an implicit contrast. as u.s. politicians trade recriminations, moscow officials appear united and on message. and as trump publicly savages his critics, russian president vladimir putin remains silent and above the fray.

dysfunctional trump

this difference between the two leaders is emphasized at every turn. trump, despite his mueller victory, is portrayed as weak, even as russian pundits speculate that he may now win re-election.

“there’s a chance to re-set much in our relations, but whether trump will take the risk – that’s the question,” sen. konstantin kosachev, chairman of the federation council’s foreign affairs committee, wrote monday on facebook.

kosachev went on to urge trump to revisit his decision to pull out of treaties limiting nuclear weapons in the u.s. and russia.

while kosachev’s language was tempered, his underlying message was a critical one, suggesting that washington, not moscow, disregards global well-being.

it’s the same line most russian media takes in all international stories with a u.s. angle. that includes what russia claims is the administration’s disastrous decision to recognize israeli sovereignty over the golan heights. as the anchor of a monday television report on channel one said in regard to the golan: “we are seeing how america’s hysterical internal politics are morphing into external politics” that are becoming a “growing global pain in the ass.”

in a 2018 skit on the popular show “comedy club,” two trump and putin impersonators faced off against each other in a game show called “where’s the logic?”

by way of introduction, the game show’s host posed a series of what were meant to be humorous questions.

“why is it that a country that builds the longest bridge in europe is considered an ‘aggressor’ and the one that builds a wall against mexicans a full democracy?” he asked. the bridge referred to is, ironically, one that runs from the russian mainland to crimea, the ukrainian territory that russia annexed in 2014 amid international outcry.

the skit showed trump as a bumbling, blustering figure who was consistently outmaneuvered by putin. the russian president was portrayed as knowing more about secret u.s. military sites around the world than trump did. putin – no surprise – ultimately won the contest 6-0.

such cultural productions are important, because they provide the backdrop against which russian leaders are responding to the mueller report as well as framing their future relations with the united states.

their message: putin is stronger than trump, and in any challenge, russia wins.

this article has been updated to correct the attorney general’s name.media playback is unsupported on your device media caption speaking in court, paul whelan alleges abuse by russian authorities

a former us marine imprisoned in russia on suspicion of spying has complained of "abuses and harassment" and says he is a "victim of political kidnap".

mr whelan - a citizen of the us, uk, canada and ireland - was arrested in late december, accused of espionage.

the 48-year-old denies the charges and told a court on friday that he had been subjected to threats and abuse by a security service investigator.

the comments came as his pre-trial custody was extended until 29 august.

mr whelan told the court that there was "absolutely no legitimacy" to the case against him, describing it as retaliation for us sanctions.

if found guilty, he faces up to 20 years in prison.

he said he had not showered in two weeks, was unable to access medical or dental treatment and had been denied access to books and letters sent to him months ago.

"i've been threatened. my personal safety has been threatened. there are abuses and harassment that i am constantly subjected to," he said.

the court hearing on friday was held behind closed doors but visitors were permitted to attend the opening and the reading of the ruling.

an official at the us embassy in moscow said washington was extremely concerned by mr whelan's claims.

the comments marked a shift in tone from previous statements by the former marine, who told the bbc's sarah rainsford in february that he was "holding up well" after two months in custody but could not talk publicly about the charge against him for fear of making his situation worse.

media playback is unsupported on your device media caption in february paul whelan spoke to the bbc's sarah rainsford

in the courtroom

sarah rainsford, bbc news, moscow

paul whelan is angry and he's no longer hiding it. standing inside a metal cage in court the former us marine declared that his detention in moscow and the charge of espionage was a political kidnap, with nothing legitimate about it.

moments later he told the judge he wanted to complain about his interrogator from russia's fsb security service, saying "his actions, abuse, harassment and the threats on my life are unprofessional and should not be tolerated". the judge ignored him.

these are by far the strongest comments mr whelan has ever made in his case. he's been held now for five months in an fsb prison, accused of receiving russian state secrets on a flash drive from a friend. he denies the charge, saying he thought the drive contained photographs from a tourist trip.

earlier he had said he wanted to make a statement to donald trump and to the us congress, but his masked fsb guards told him he was forbidden to speak.

the us ambassador in moscow has said no evidence has been presented in this case in five months and called on russia to 'quit playing games'

the hearing itself is closed - as an espionage case - and labelled top secret.

why was he arrested?

mr whelan arrived in russia on 22 december to attend a wedding and had planned to visit st petersburg in addition to moscow before flying home on 6 january, his brother told the bbc.

he was arrested in moscow on 28 december after taking a group of wedding guests on a tour of the kremlin museums.

russia's fsb state security agency said he was detained "during an act of espionage".

mr whelan's russian lawyer has said the arrest was made after he was unwittingly handed a memory stick containing state secrets.

media playback is unsupported on your device media caption david whelan comments on his brother's arrest by russian authorities

who is he?

mr whelan was born in canada to british parents but moved to the us as a child. he is currently director of global security for michigan-based automotive components supplier borgwarner.

his brother has said mr whelan had been visiting russia for business and pleasure since 2007.

mr whelan joined the marine reserves in 1994 and rose to the rank of staff sergeant in 2004. he served in iraq for several months in 2004 and 2006.

he was convicted in a 2008 court martial on charges related to larceny and received a bad-conduct discharge. details of the charges are not public.