as the eurostar pulled into the cavernous entrance of the gare du nord at dusk, i sat back for a moment and watched the same commuters i’d seen elegantly sipping their sauvignon blancs and café noirs just a moment ago lose their grace, awkwardly pushing, struggling with baggage and queueing up to dash out on to the platform. they had families to catch up with, friends to see, business to attend to and parties to schmooze at – the things i was about to opt out of for a few months.

having no obligations should have been a pleasant feeling, i suppose, and yet, sitting there alone on the eurostar, rain droplets on the windows disfiguring the platform beyond them, and west african cleaners as shadow-like as ralph ellison’s invisible man taking the place of those well-heeled commuters i’d just seen alight, i experienced the kind of trepidation people often have before setting out on a long journey. it suddenly struck me that what lay before me was an empty, disquieting expanse of loneliness and uncertainty. that i’d just entered a geographic landmass in which i would be a foreigner in every capacity. was there really a cohesive idea of a black europe i might find some sort of solidarity with? everything suddenly struck me as an abstraction: who was “black”? what was “europe”?

with a sense of foreboding pulling me back into my seat, i sat for a few minutes until i must have been the last passenger on the train, surrounded by the remnants left behind by my former travelling companions – empty crisp packets, mini bottles of wine rolling on their side and tables stained with coffee rings – and learned the lesson of slowing down in order to tap into a new big-city frequency. various tempos reveal different realities, and very often europe’s black workforce inhabits the liminal terrain i’d just experienced, as cleaners, taxi drivers, porters, security guards, ticket sellers and nightclub bouncers; they are there and not there. i knew of this world already, of course; i’d been part of it in the past but had never before thought of it as an invisible world through which white europe blithely passes without ever really seeing.

i watched the two senegalese men joke with one another in creolised french, making the most of the banality of tidying and preparing the carriage for what would likely be another set of mostly white commuters. this job was hardly enviable, and struck me as symbolic of a power dynamic between africans and europeans that hadn’t changed for centuries; whatever european countries like to suggest, black people were still cleaning white people’s toilets, changing their bedsheets, guarding their buildings and sweeping their floors. they were also being accused of “stealing” these jobs (which nobody wanted) while simultaneously managing, somehow, to live as lazy freeloaders. they could be both these things in the imagination, on news bulletins, in the right-leaning press, as long as nobody ever really acknowledged their existence in daily interactions, as long as their lives and humanity and work were all rendered invisible in the flesh.

facebook twitter pinterest la bite, paris. photograph: johny pitts

as soon as i stepped down on to the platform, paris presented itself as a city occupied by african communities in a way even i had never noticed on previous trips. i suppose, if i had been searching europe for its pensioners, or its chinese communities, the continent would appear full of those demographics, too. i knew that, apart from london, paris had the largest black presence in europe, but it struck me as overwhelmingly black, from station staff to the commuters passing through and on the métro, as i voyaged beneath the north african quarter of barbès-rochechouart and the west african market hub of château rouge on line 4, to my digs on rue caulaincourt. this was also a city that had its very own tours designed to celebrate this long, rich history, and i’d booked to be on one of them the day after i arrived, curious to see some commerce centred around black tourism.

after a terrible night full of anonymous snores and stinks (my first ever night in a hostel), i overslept and woke up groggy, worried i was going to be too late for the tour. in my email correspondence with the tour leader, ricki stevenson, however, she wrote: “we never leave anyone behind, so don’t worry if you’re running on french-people time.” when i finally arrived, 10 minutes late, at our meeting point, brioche dorée, a somewhat banal french cafe chain, i felt an eager curiosity about what i’d find. how many people would be taking the black paris tour? would they be black or white? what had brought them to it?

in the corner of the room sat a black man and woman, middle-aged and neatly dressed, obviously waiting for somebody. they were distinct from the many black french customers at the cafe and i knew they were african american from a mile away.

they were jimmy and niecy brown, and jimmy pronounced their names as though they were a business. he was miffed that ricki, our guide, hadn’t yet shown up, and wary and defensive of me until he found out that my dad had been born and raised in brooklyn. when i saw his frostiness thaw a little at the mention of this, i laid on my second-hand african americanness thickly, not putting on an accent exactly but softening my “t”s a little and saying things like “so whadda you guys doing so far from ‘home’?”, implying that america was a psychic home we shared. i talked of the cook-outs we have at the pitts family reunions every year in south carolina. i was sort of mimicking the way i’d noticed my dad act when he was around other african americans in the uk. watching him, i’d always feel as though he was a member of a secret club that my mum and i didn’t have access to. my dad never tried to be overtly english, and still has his brooklyn accent after four decades living in sheffield, but something about his character would change when he met a fellow african american. he was mildly subdued, slightly secretive even, when he presented himself in interactions with brits, black or white, but would suddenly come alive when speaking to a “brother”. that was one of the words he’d use, and he’d laugh and clown in a way that made me, with my yorkshire accent, feel envious and flat.

facebook twitter pinterest barbes rochechouart, paris. photograph: johny pitts

jimmy was boasting that he’d already seen half the world but had made this particular trip because he’d always promised niecy he’d whisk her off to see paris, a city that occupies a special place in the imagination of many african americans. just then two women walked – or, more accurately, sauntered – over. though these women were both american, unlike jimmy and niecy they could have passed for french, one wearing a red woollen beret with a woollen jacket, the other in a crocheted hat and a yellow mac. one of these elegant women turned out to be our guide.

right from the start, i could see that jimmy was going to give ricki a hard time. she introduced herself warmly: “hi, i’m ricki stevenson, and i’m gonna go ahead and guess that you all are my group.” but jimmy just scowled and said: “we were starting to think you might not show up.” the woman she was with, also african american, was called clemence, worked at a publishing company in new york and was a trainee tea master. both women were middle-class academics, and their knowledge seemed to clash with jimmy’s, who would go on to dismiss almost all their observations with his own brand of experiential wisdom. he was keen to let us all know he had lived and that his education at the school of life was where the real knowledge was at.

we had to say why we were taking the tour, and i stumbled over my words, incoherently spurting out that i was thinking of writing a book about black europe, which i regretted immediately, but at the mention of this the table came alive, saying how it was a great idea. clemence asked if she could see a manuscript once it had been written (it was the first time i’d had the notion that my scruffy notebooks might one day form something called a “manuscript”). jimmy said: “i’ve got some stories for your book”, and ricki mentioned texts for research, such as three years in europe by william wells brown (1852).

after our introductions, ricki handed us all a sheet of paper with a list of names of black historical figures, then asked us to put a tick next to all the people we thought might have either lived in paris or had a strong connection with the city. if i had played the game in earnest, i’d have ticked off maybe a third of the names, but i suspected it was a trick question and that everyone on the list should be ticked. i didn’t say so, because i didn’t want to spoil ricki’s big reveal – that would be a job for jimmy.

facebook twitter pinterest coulaincourt, paris. photograph: johny pitts

“you pro’ly just gon’ tell us they all been here,” he said.

“and you’d be correct,” replied ricki, unfazed by the smart alec of the group, and went on to tell us about alexandre dumas, who carved out a legendary space in the canon of french literature with world-famous novels such as the three musketeers (1844) and the count of monte cristo (1844–5). dumas’s west african grandmother, marie-cessette, had been an enslaved woman working on a plantation in haiti in the late 1700s and was ultimately emancipated because of her physical beauty – bought for a “golden price” by marquis alexandre antoine davy de la pailleterie, a french nobleman. it’s unclear how complicit marie-cessette was in the love affair that would ensue with her “master”. on the one hand, when his finances started to wane, the marquis sold the four children he had with marie-cessette back into slavery, indicating that the power dynamic between white master and black slaves hadn’t shifted terribly. on the other hand, he did sell the children to a “mulatto” colonialist, perhaps in the hope of fairer treatment, and eventually bought back his only son, later sending him to paris to attend a prestigious military school. this young boy was thomas-alexandre dumas, who would go on to become a general in the french army and the highest-ranking black soldier in europe’s history, and himself had a son who would become one of the most famous french novelists of all time, alexandre dumas. alexandre dumas’s son, also alexandre, would go on to achieve a lauded place in french society as a playwright and novelist. jean-fernand brierre, the haitian poet and politician who contributed much to the negritude movement, was a descendant of marie-cessette’s sister rosette. this is the type of grand afropean lineage you don’t often hear about.

as the tour group headed out along the champs-élysées, ricki made not just contemporary blackness visible but lifted the veil of europe to reveal black histories all over the city. paris’s most famous avenue was no longer a place of high-end boutiques and suggestions of white european greatness but evocative of the 369th infantry regiment, also known as the harlem hellfighters (due to being comprised mostly of men of african american and puerto rican descent – who made up the cultural language of harlem in the early 20th century). stationed in france during the first world war, they fought bravely in the trenches, setting a record for the longest deployment of any unit, playing an instrumental role in several key battles and winning the french croix de guerre medal for bravery. despite this acknowledgement, when the war was won, us government officials refused to allow them to join the 1919 champs-élysées victory march, a racist pr manoeuvre the allies would later replicate at the end of the second world war with regard to black soldiers from the french colonies. the hellfighters managed to leave a lasting legacy not just through their bravery but also through their music; under the direction of band leader james reese europe, they essentially introduced france to jazz and doo wop, an indelible mark no member of the government could erase.

‘this idea african americans have about racism not existing in france is ridiculous because it does, in abundance’

when we arrived at the arc de triomphe, ricki told us how the monument had been turned into a symbol of freedom and a place of pilgrimage by african american artists and intellectuals who had visited the city, from frederick douglass to booker t washington and countee cullen, ever since, said ricki, “william wells brown climbed its stairs in 1849 and described how ‘you could look out on a city where you are finally free, even from bounty hunters and fugitive slave laws’”. this imagining of paris still holds weight for many, and i saw it in the eyes of jimmy when we were on the bus driving towards [the american novelist] richard wright’s former home in the suburb of neuilly. he was looking wistfully out of the window at the coffee-coloured townhouses and the stylish parisians filling the streets and found it hard to believe that anybody actually lived in such a place. the whole city was, for jimmy, a film set, with even its homeless people appearing to him as something oddly picturesque – this wasn’t skid row in los angeles, it was les mis poverty, roma women in headscarves begging beneath dramatic napoleonic fountains and scattering pigeons. he turned to ricki and asked if she liked it in paris. because everything he’d said so far had seemed loaded, ricki was unsure where he was going with the question and asked him what he meant.

“do. you. like. it. here?” he repeated pointedly, and ricki told him that yes, of course she did, and wanted to know why he asked, and suddenly his facial expression became earnest.

“because i do, too. i could live here, you know. i walk around the streets and it feels as though people don’t see me. in a good way, i mean. it’s like i ain’t black here, i’m just a human being.”

facebook twitter pinterest rome. johny pitts’s research for afropean took him all over europe. photograph: johny pitts

“well, that’s because you’re an american, jimmy,” said ricki. “the afro-french have a very different experience here than you or me. this idea african americans have about racism not existing in france is ridiculous because it does, in abundance. even if you look at some of the comparatively successful african americans who came and lived in france – baldwin, wright, baker and many others – you’ll notice that they all died alone, and often penniless.” jimmy, though, was too busy admiring the view out of the bus window – he’d barely listened to a thing ricki had said all day and, more and more, i found it hard to concentrate on the information ricki was giving me because jimmy had started to sort of take me under his wing. i would be taking two tours for the price of one: ricki stevenson’s tour of black paris, and jimmy brown’s tour of his own life, a life that at least partly explained the romance of europe held by black americans.

much like my dad and many of the people ricki mentioned who managed to make a home in europe, as a young man jimmy had escaped a violently racist america for a europe that perhaps exoticised african americans but at least wasn’t lynching them. he left as a 17-year-old with the us navy’s submarine division in the 1960s, hating white people, he said. that’s when he found what he called his “promised land”. and the name of this utopia?

“scotland. we were stationed in holy loch and what i loved about that place was that nobody was prejudged on race but instead on faith – it wasn’t about whether you were black or white, it was about being protestant or catholic. that’s when i realised it wasn’t white people who were my enemies, but american whites.”

we headed north towards neuilly, an upmarket district and formerly the home and hangout spot of a number of black intellectuals from the 30s to the 60s, including james baldwin and his sometime friend, mentor and, later, rival, richard wright. just before entering the district, ricki stopped us on a bridge overlooking a bypass. “see that stream of cars down there? that piece of road circles right around central paris and is known as le périphérique. everything outside the periphery is considered a suburb. we are about to enter one of the nice suburbs of paris, but the french word for “suburb” usually has connotations of something much less quaint than in english – as you can see, there is a different world outside that romantic depiction of paris on postcards.”

ricki pointed towards a series of spooky white tower blocks standing ominously in the distance, illuminated by a low sun and shimmering in the hazy pollution like an otherworldly apparition. it really was another world. ricki told us that some say the word for “suburb”, banlieue, comes from the words bannissement (“banishment”) and lieu (“place”). banlieue: “place of banishment”. in the early 19th century, paris was a city rampant with crime and disease so, funded largely by colonial riches from africa, napoleon iii decided to clear the slums, commissioning city planner georges-eugène haussmann to create a new paris with better sewage systems and wider streets that could be patrolled and controlled, to replace the shady, revolution-friendly labyrinth the city had become. aside from the newer streets being easier to police, the poor and unwanted were also driven further out of the centre of paris because of the higher rents these new, luxurious townhouses commanded. it was the era that gave birth to the paris the world knows and loves but, today, beyond the periphery, the “banished ones” still reside, now often immigrants from west and north africa, as well as roma travelling communities who are cut off from the centre of the city geographically and imaginatively. napoleon and haussmann may have pushed the poor out, but it was another legendary architect, le corbusier, who, in contrast to the extravagant haussmann (and, in many ways, attempting to serve as an antithesis), created a template for the concrete tower blocks that are home to such social unrest today.

with a design principle called unité d’habitation, le corbusier gave birth to a new architectural idea that would spread across france and the rest of the world like wildfire in the postwar years and, in essence, spawn the birth of what we now know as the projects, or council estates. both haussmann and le corbusier were ahead of their time and appear to have had good intentions, but between them they created a landscape perfect for breeding angst in poor communities. through his luxurious housing ideals, haussmann first pushed the poor out of the heart of the city, and then, with depressing austerity and modernist experimentation, le corbusier pushed them up into the sky, into faceless concrete cages sandwiched on top of one another, later left to fall into decay by the state.

facebook twitter pinterest bern, switzerland. photograph: johny pitts

the area of the city richard wright and james baldwin inhabited in the 40s and 50s was haussmann’s paris, and neuilly, now among the most expensive districts in the city, was even then unobtainable for most of the afro-french community. walking down the main boulevard, through artisanal market stalls selling mouthwatering tapenades, cheeses and saucissons, kicking through autumn leaves that matched the warm, neutral hues of the buildings, then looking up at beautiful iron balconies jutting out from windows with wooden french shutters, it was easy to see what inspired this unashamedly gushing love letter. wright, author of the polemical american classic native son (1940), wrote about his adoptive home in the 40s:

“yes, the effect of paris is deep! paris does something to one and what it does is good – i love this, my adopted city. naturally in such an atmosphere there is no race tension or conflict. men are not prejudged here on the basis of their skin or nationality, and i have never heard a frenchman tell anybody to ‘go back where you came from’. i have encountered among the french no social snobbery: men are accepted as individuals, the more individualistic a man is the more acceptable he is… the french are a civilised people and to live among them is a joy. ‘sois raisonnable’ – that is, ‘be reasonable’ – is their motto.”

only a few days later i would find myself wandering around a banlieue where wright’s words, the type that still so often inform african american ideas about paris, tragically contradicted the modern-day reality for many of its black population. as informative as the tour of black paris was – and i got the feeling ricki was tailoring it to this particular group – the focus on stories of expats and the general feeling of african american exceptionalism began to frustrate me a little.

‘welcome to little africa!’ said ricki, as we alighted from another bus and finally immersed ourselves in some afro-french culture rather than an expat american one. “little africa” was ricki’s name for the neighbouring areas of château rouge and barbès-rochechouart, and we were greeted by a crowded and discombobulating street full of senegalese, cameroonian, algerian, tunisian and moroccan market stalls. the haussmann buildings that cocooned it all were losing their battle to stay parisian cliches, their facades and interiors reverse-colonised by african aesthetics. senegalese women bartered for a better price at fruit stalls and old men gossiped on mismatched chairs planted on street corners as arabic men entered a makeshift mosque. my african american friends were in a state of shock. “this is insane,” said jimmy, about seven or eight times, and then: “it’s like we on 125th,” referring to the street in new york that runs through harlem.

what struck me most was how out of place they all looked as african americans, how frigid and conservative they suddenly appeared. jimmy kept telling niecy to watch her bag and clemence was on edge, as though worried about touching anything and getting dirty. there was a nervous haughtiness about the way they held themselves. i, on the other hand, felt completely relaxed: château rouge wasn’t so different to firth park, where i grew up, or the part of peckham i lived in in london. the stores in château rouge were fiercely independent, with beautiful diy signage, fonts painted by hand, very slightly off-kilter, like old coca-cola logos on haitian beach shacks. they sold oddments: outdated electronics, ghanaian fabrics, mixtapes from côte d’ivoire, specific ingredients for african recipes and palates, and intricate haircuts. château rouge was brimming with treasure and junk – the backwash of second-hand one-offs from africa and europe, antiqued by journeys between the two.

ricki told us we’d reached our last spot on the tour: her favourite senegalese restaurant.

how football is reframing the way we think about race | johny pitts read more

ricki had been a soldier. the tour had been a challenging one: clemence turned her nose up at everything, niecy didn’t seem to understand anything and jimmy and i spent most of our time back from the group, him talking, me trying to make sure i memorised everything he was saying to write down later. i felt a bit sorry for her at the end of it all; even this big “ta-dah!” at the end of a long day had turned sour. the food, i thought, was excellent, and as we ate we were serenaded by a man playing his kora (a harp-like west african instrument), but after a few spoonfuls jimmy said: “i wanna get out of here,” and clemence whispered to niecy: “i bet the hygiene is poor.”

after the meal, we said our goodbyes and exchanged email addresses, promising to stay in touch, and there was suddenly an odd sense of camaraderie, or perhaps acknowledgement, the type you give someone when you know you’ve just experienced something with them that, for better or worse, you’ll remember for a long time. i was glad to have met jimmy and niecy brown, clemence with her beret, and elegant, knowledgeable ricki, but i left the tour with no doubt in my mind that, despite my best impressions, and the blood in my veins, i would have to look beyond african america for answers about my situation as a black man in europe and orient myself more confidently along an afropean axis.

• afropean: notes from black europe is published by allen lane (£20). to order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. free uk p&p over £15, online orders only. phone orders min p&p of £1.99france's first female education minister placed herself firmly at the centre of the controversy around the string of “burkini bans” in the country when she spoke out in strong terms against the restrictions.

moroccan-born najat vallaud-belkacem, who describes herself as a “non-practicing muslim”, described the prohibition of burkinis as “a threat to individual freedoms”.

speaking to french radio channel e1 matin, the politician said that while she was against women being forced to wear the burkini, she strongly opposed the bans on modest swimwear that have swept across french cities and communes during this summer.

we’ll tell you what’s true. you can form your own view. from 15p €0.18 $0.18 usd 0.27 a day, more exclusives, analysis and extras.

“if you’re asking me in a general context whether i’m for or against the burkini, the response is simple: i oppose the burkini. i think you know my feminist convictions and know that my dream is a society where women are free to do what they like,” she said.

“but if you ask me whether i agree with the polemic against the burkini in the past week, the response is no. definitely not.”

ms vallaud-belkacem continued: “i think at this serious time, post-attacks, when many french people are worried, you shouldn’t add fuel to the fire. you should be appeasing people as much as possible, not stigmatising them. the ban of the burkini puts into question people's individual freedoms."

her words provoked a vicious backlash from the french prime minister manuel valls, who said the comments were “a bad interpretation” of the ban, insisting the measures were “taken in the name of public order”.

it is not the first time ms vallaud-belkacem has been in the headlines for subverting mainstream politics. born in a rural village in the moroccan countryside of bni chiker, the second child of seven siblings, her appointment to the cabinet in 2012 came as a shock to many. an immigrant by status, her background alone made her an outlander in the bourgeoise-studded world of french politics.

after spending her early years in the hazy rural landscapes of the rif mountain ranges in northern morocco, four-year-old najat moved with her mother and sister to france, where they joined her father, a construction worker, in the northern city of amiens. conscious as a child of her immigrant status, ms vallaud-belkacem's interest in politics began to kindle from an early age.

after a glowing academic journey through school, ms vallaud-belkacem received a scholarship to attend the university at paris institute of political studies, a privelige she said made her a “pure product of the [egalitarianism] of the [french] republic". she graduated in 2002 at the age of 26, and became a member of the socialist party the same year.

less than a year after entering the world of politics, ms vallaud-belkacem had been given a position working for the mayor of lyon. two years on she was elected to the regional council of the wider region, leading movements to strengthen local democracy, fight discrimination and promote citizens' rights, while also working for the campaign team of prominent socialist party member marie-ségolène royal.

ms vallaud-belkacem married her civil servant husband boris vallaud in 2005, after their romance blossomed at university. four years later she gave birth to a set of twins - a boy and a girl - who she has said they brought up to "reject gender stereotypes". ms vallaud-belkacem's staunch view on gender equality transcended into her political career. in 2012, when she was appointed minister for women's affairs, she used the platform to stand up for the legalisation of gay marriage and gender ideology - a stance criticised by many.

two years after joining the cabinet ms vallaud-belkacem was appointed to minister of education, making triple history by becoming not only the first ever female to be appointed to the role, but also the first muslim and youngest person ever to be given the high-profile position.

while her ground-breaking appointment marked a victory for progressive thinkers in france's modern regime, it wasn't welcomed by everyone in the national assembly. ms vallaud-belkacem's unconventional background and liberal beliefs made her victim to the nastiness of french politics, and in the weeks after landing the role she was besieged by racist and sexist comments and malicious rumours on social media. right-wing magazines and conservative figures claimed her appointment was a “provocation” and a politically-correct engineering by the president.

in the years since her appointment attacks against both ms vallaud-belkacem's gender and her immigrant status have not completely abated. she has been accused by right-wing figures of flaunting her charms and attacked by two far-right magazines for her moroccan origins in the last two years, shedding light on the steep traditionalism and intolerance that still pervades french politics.

but 35 years after emigrating from morocco, ms vallaud-belkacem is making her mark as a strong-willed, female, muslim politician at the heart of a country rocked by divisiveness.a plain-speaking candidate with a business background was running for president and the polls gave him little chance after a series of outbursts decried as racist. but it was the pollsters who ended up with egg on their faces.

it is not just the story of donald trump in 2016 america, but also france’s jean-marie le pen in 2002.

far-right leader mr le pen pulled off a surprise by qualifying for the second round of the presidential election where -- this time correctly forecast by pollsters -- he was routed by incumbent jacques chirac. polls had all expected mr chirac to face off against socialist candidate lionel jospin.

we’ll tell you what’s true. you can form your own view. from 15p €0.18 $0.18 usd 0.27 a day, more exclusives, analysis and extras.

france holds presidential elections again in 2017 and after two major political upsets in recent months -- mr trump’s u.s. victory followed britain’s brexit vote in june - eyes are on jean-marie’s daughter marine who is on track to repeat her father’s achievement and is promising a referendum on whether to pull france out of the european union.

france’s main pollsters are all projecting the national front leader will take one of the top two spots in april’s first round. but they also see her losing in a run-off to the center-right republicans’ candidate by a wide margin. though bookmakers have cut the odds on a le pen presidency sharply since trump’s upset, pollsters say they are confident that snapshot is accurately reflecting the national mood six months out from the vote.

“i’d never say ‘never’ but i do think we have some advantages that our u.s. colleagues don’t,” said bruno jeanbert, deputy managing director at pollsters opinionway. “a trump-style surprise is less likely here.”

according to a bva poll carried out between october 14 and october 19, mrs le pen would win between 25 per cent and 29 per cent of the vote in next april’s first round. if she faces bordeaux mayor alain juppe - the favorite to win the republicans primary - she would lose the may 7 run-off by more than 30 percentage points. if it’s former president nicolas sarkozy, the margin would be 12 points.

that’s a much wider advantage than hillary clinton held over mr trump in days before the us election on november 8, so the chances of an upset are more remote, according to holger schmieding, chief economist at berenberg bank. all the same, the bookmaker ladbrokes has cut the odds on mrs le pen to 7-to-4 from 5-to-1 before the us election, implying a 36 per cent chance of victory.

“we are fairly confident that le pen will not win,” schmieding wrote in a note to clients nov. 11. “still, we need to monitor the political risks very closely.”

french pollsters have the benefit of experience. mr trump’s candidacy had no precedent in us politics so pollsters had no reference point to gauge whether voters were reluctant to admit they were backing him. the french have had a chance to re-calibrate since 2002.

“we missed the rising support for jean-marie le pen,” said yves-marie cann, director of political studies at pollster elabe. “but we have adjusted our methods and in past elections we were pretty close to the final outcome. that does argue for some confidence in our work.”

in addition, mrs le pen has worked to make her version of the national front more conventional. she’s thrown her father out of the party, repudiated his racist and anti-semitic comments to focus more on the economy, and makes frequent appearances in the media. all that makes voters less likely to hide their support for her, cann said.

even before the emergence of the first le pen, french pollsters were used to tracking the fortunes of more extreme movements. in the 1970s, the communist party was routinely taking more than 20 percent of the first-round presidential vote.

“trump was a new phenomena,” said opinionway’s mr jeanbert. “we have a longer tradition of protest votes.”

there are still issues which will shape the race between now and polling day. president francois hollande has yet to decide whether he will seek re-election. if he doesn’t run, another socialist candidate would enter the race but at this stage, polls show any socialist candidate would fail to qualify for the second round. president hollande’s former economy minister emmanuel macron declared an independent bid wednesday, potentially siphoning more votes away from the mainstream parties.

shape created with sketch. world news in pictures show all 50 left created with sketch. right created with sketch. shape created with sketch. world news in pictures 1/50 25 may 2019 an indian paramilitary soldiers stands guard in front of closed shops during restrictions in downtown area of srinagar, the summer capital of indian kashmir epa 2/50 24 may 2019 pope francis gestures as he participates alongside thousands of soccer-mad children in a project to promote the values of sport and soccer, at the vatican reuters 3/50 23 may 2019 bharatiya janata party (bjp) supporters celebrate their party's potential win as votes are counted for the lok sabha election in bangalore, india. the lok sabha, the lower house of parliament, elections, began on 11 april and held for 542 of the 543 lower house seats. a party or alliance needs 272 seats to form a government. it was announced that narendra modi was to retain the position of prime minister along with the bjp epa 4/50 22 may 2019 palestinian children help their father sort through arugula produce before he heads to sell it at a market, in an impoverished area in beit lahia in the northern gaza strip afp/getty 5/50 21 may 2019 indonesia's incumbent president from the indonesian democratic party of struggle (pdip) joko widodo takes a selfie with local residents after his victory speech following the announcement of the election results at a slum area in jakarta. joko widodo was re-elected after beating his rival, retired general prabowo subianto epa 6/50 20 may 2019 president-elect volodymyr zelensky holding an ancient bulava (historical symbol of the state power) during his inauguration in the ukrainian parliament in kiev. mr zelensky with 73,22 percent of the votes beat out the current president petro poroshenko, who received 24,45 percent of the votes during the second tour of presidential elections in ukraine which was held on 21 april presidential press service/epa 7/50 19 may 2019 sudanese protesters gather for a sit-in outside the military headquarters in khartoum. talks between sudan's ruling military council and protesters are set to resume, army rulers announced, as islamic movements rallied for the inclusion of sharia in the country's roadmap afp/getty 8/50 18 may 2019 james hinchcliffe of canada rolls his car after hitting the wall during qualifications for the indianapolis 500 indycar auto race in indiana, us ap 9/50 17 may 2019 taiwan became first state in asia to legalise same-sex marriage. thousands of gay rights supporters gathered outside parliament in taipei during the debate epa 10/50 16 may 2019 spectators watch as riders take the start of stage six of the 102nd giro d'italia, tour of italy, race, 238kms from cassino to san giovanni rotondo afp/getty 11/50 15 may 2019 buildings in hung hom district are shrouded in coastal fog in hong kong, china. in springtime, hong kong is affected by alternate cold and warm air. as cold air from the north recedes, warm and humid air comes in from the sea and as the water near the coast is still rather cold, the warm and humid air may be cooled sufficiently by the underlying cold water epa 12/50 14 may 2019 an indian worker packs mangos for sale at a wholesale fruit market in jammu, the winter capital of kashmir. mango is regarded as the national fruit of india, pakistan, bangladesh and the philippines. india is one of the leading producers of tropical and subtropical fruits in the world and is said to be the world's largest mango producer epa 13/50 13 may 2019 a nurse carries a newborn baby after a fire broke out on the terrace of a children's hospital building in ahmedabad, india reuters 14/50 12 may 2019 members of the action group extinction rebellion hold banners in front of the eiffel tower after spilling fake blood on the trocadero esplanade during a demonstration to alert on the state of decline of biodiversity, in paris. extinction rebellion is an international movement that uses non-violent civil disobedience to achieve radical change in order to minimise the risk of human extinction and ecological collapse afp/getty 15/50 11 may 2019 an armed police officer greets members of the muslim community in front of al noor mosque as they arrive for the iftar, the evening meal, in christchurch, new zealand. muslims around the world are observing the holiest month of ramadan, fasting from sunrise to sunset for a month. ramadan this year will be slightly sombre for new zealand muslims - especially those in christchurch - in the wake of the mosque terror attacks where 51 people died after a gunman opened fire during friday prayers at linwood and al noor mosques on march 15 getty 16/50 10 may 2019 muslims perform prayers on a road outside a mosque on the first friday of the holy fasting month of ramadan in srinagar reuters 17/50 9 may 2019 german chancellor angela merkel greets people after posing for a family photo during the informal meeting of european union leaders in sibiu, romania reuters 18/50 8 may 2019 smokes rises after a huge explosion near the offices of the attorney general in kabul, afghanistan. two police officials say wednesday's explosion was followed by a gunbattle between militants and security forces ap 19/50 7 may 2019 reuters reporters wa lone and kyaw soe oo wave as they walk to insein prison gate as they were freed, after receiving a presidential pardon in yangon, myanmar reuters 20/50 6 may 2019 students sit in circles as they read the koran on the first day of ramadan at ar-raudhatul hasanah islamic boarding school in medan, north sumatra, indonesia. muslims around the world celebrate the holy month of ramadan by praying during the night time and abstaining from eating, drinking, and sexual acts during the period between sunrise and sunset. ramadan is the ninth month in the islamic calendar and it is believed that the revelation of the first verse in koran was during its last 10 nights epa 21/50 5 may 2019 dutch prime minister mark rutte ignites the liberation fire during the liberation festival in almere, the netherlands. epa 22/50 4 may 2019 demonstrators wearing bees masks and costumes lie on the ground during a demonstration for biodiversity called by the world wide fund for nature (wwf) in paris. afp/getty images 23/50 3 may 2019 caster semenya celebrates after winning the women's 800m at the iaaf diamond league competition in doha afp/getty 24/50 2 may 2019 children chant slogans as they watch a demonstration outside the army headquarters in khartoum. crowds of sudanese protesters began converging in khartoum for a "million-strong" march to press for a civilian administration after talks with military rulers ran into trouble afp/getty 25/50 1 may 2019 people hold blue, white and red smoke bombs as they demonstrate to mark may day in toulouse. france's zero-tolerance approach to protest violence will be tested, when a mix of labour unionists, "yellow vest" demonstrators and hardline hooligans are expected to hit the streets on labour day afp/getty 26/50 opponents to venezuela's president nicolas maduro face off with bolivarian national guards in armored vehicles, loyal to the president, during an attempted military uprising in caracas, venezuela. opposition leader juan guaido took to the streets with a small contingent of heavily armed troops in a call for the military to rise up and oust madur ap 27/50 29 april 2019 in this aereal view officials measure a giant teddy bear measuring more than 20 meters long and 4 tons of weight, which entered the guiness book of world records as the biggest of its kind in xonacatlan, mexico state. afp/getty images 28/50 28 april 2019 competitors ride their bikes along sand dunes during the stage 1 of the 14th edition of titan desert 2019 mountain biking race around merzouga in morocco afp/getty 29/50 27 april 2019 greenpeace activists hold banners reading "climate urgency: think, vote, act" on top of the columbus (colon) monument in barcelona on april 27, 2019 as part of an awareness campaign on the eve of spain's general elections. - spain returns to the polls on april 28 for unpredictable snap elections marked by the resurgence of the far-right after more than four decades on the outer margins of politics. afp/getty 30/50 26 april 2019 a security officer stands guard outside st. anthony's shrine, days after a string of suicide bomb attacks on churches and luxury hotels across the island on easter sunday, in colombo, sri lanka reuters 31/50 25 april 2019 palestinian beekeepers inspect beehives at the honey-bee farm in the east of khan younis town, near the border with israel, southern gaza strip. the beekeepers collect honey and wax from beehives at this time of this year epa 32/50 24 april 2019 north korean leader kim jong-un inspects a russian honor guard after arriving at a railway station in vladivostok, for the summit to be held with russian president vladimir putin epa 33/50 23 april 2019 india's prime minister narendra modi gestures as he holds the granddaughter of india's ruling bharatiya janata party (bjp) president amit shah after he arrives to cast his vote at a polling station during the third phase of general election in ahmedabad reuters 34/50 22 april 2019 a woman living near st anthony's shrine runs for safety with her baby after police found explosive devices in a parked vehicle in colombo, sri lanka. bombings on easter sunday ripped through churches and luxury hotels killing at least 290 people ap 35/50 21 april 2019 police and security personnel stand guard outside the shangri-la hotel in sri lankan capital colombo after a bombing attack; one of eight across the country on easter sunday epa 36/50 20 april 2019 a protester walks amid tear gas deployed by security services on the 23rd week of gilets jaunes protests in paris getty 37/50 19 april 2019 ultra-orthodox jews burn leaven in the mea shearim neighbourhood of jerusalem ahead of the jewish holiday of passover, in jerusalem reuters 38/50 18 april 2019 christian worshippers take part in the procession of the holy thursday, during the catholic washing of the feet ceremony on easter holy week, at the church of the holy sepulcher in jerusalem's old city epa 39/50 17 april 2019 a young girl runs past uwsa military contingents before a parade held to mark the 30th anniversary of wa state in panghsang, also called pang kham of autonomous wa region, north-eastern myanmar. wa declared itself as an independent state on 17 april 1989. although the government of myanmar does not recognize the sovereignty of wa state, myanmar military has adopted a ceasefire with the state since 9 may 1989. wa state has been notorious for drug smuggling in the golden triangle of the last 30 years, although it declared its region a drug-free zone in 2005 epa 40/50 16 april 2019 firefighters spray water as they work to extinguish the fire at notre-dame cathedral in paris. the huge blaze that devastated the cathedral is "under control", the paris fire brigade said early on april 16 after firefighters spent hours battling the flames afp/getty 41/50 15 april 2019 smoke and flames rise during a fire at the landmark notre-dame cathedral in central paris afp/getty 42/50 14 april 2019 indonesian soldiers and police at a general security roll call for the upcoming general elections in jakarta. some 192 million indonesians are set to cast a ballot in the world's third-biggest democracy, with a record 245,000 candidates vying for positions from the presidency and parliamentary seats all the way down to local council jobs afp/getty 43/50 13 april 2019 hindu devotees throw holy flammable powder onto a fire as they perform rituals during gajan festival celebrations in kolkata. the festival falls on the last day of the bengali calendar which also coincides with the birth of lord shiva, according to hindu mythology afp/getty 44/50 12 april 2019 a woman visits the exhibition 'mirrors: in and out of reality' in barcelona, spain. maths, physics and photonics melt in this exhibition presented by cosmocaixa in which visitors can enter a big kaleidoscope to walk through and experience with the effects and particularities of mirrors. the exhibition will be open to public until 6 june 2019 epa 45/50 11 april 2019 voters line up to cast their votes outside a polling station during the first phase of general election in alipurduar district in the eastern state of west bengal, india reuters 46/50 10 april 2019 the first ever photo a black hole, taken using a global network of telescopes, conducted by the event horizon telescope (eht) project, to gain insight into celestial objects with gravitational fields so strong no mater or light can escape event horizon telescope/national science foundation/reuters 47/50 9 april 2019 sudanese protesters chant slogans as they rally in front of the military headquarters in the capital khartoum. sudan's police ordered its forces to avoid intervening against protesters as three western nations threw their weight behind demonstrators' demands for a political transition plan in the country afp/getty 48/50 8 april 2019 german chancellor angela merkel plays with a handball given to her by the german handball federation's president as she received the german national handball team at the chancellery in berlin afp/getty 49/50 7 april 2019 people hold candles as they attend a night vigil and prayer at the amahoro stadium as part of the 25th commemoration of the 1994 genocide, in kigali, rwanda. april 7 begins 100 days of mourning for more than 800,000 people who were slaughtered in a genocide that shocked the world, a quarter of a century on from the day it began afp/getty 50/50 6 april 2019 a portion of the field of 1,500 participants begins the trek to the highest point over the florida keys overseas highway's longest span during the seven mile bridge run saturday. the event features entrants running a course over the convergence of the atlantic ocean and gulf of mexico and helps to raise funds for local youth athletic programs afp/getty 1/50 25 may 2019 an indian paramilitary soldiers stands guard in front of closed shops during restrictions in downtown area of srinagar, the summer capital of indian kashmir epa 2/50 24 may 2019 pope francis gestures as he participates alongside thousands of soccer-mad children in a project to promote the values of sport and soccer, at the vatican reuters 3/50 23 may 2019 bharatiya janata party (bjp) supporters celebrate their party's potential win as votes are counted for the lok sabha election in bangalore, india. the lok sabha, the lower house of parliament, elections, began on 11 april and held for 542 of the 543 lower house seats. a party or alliance needs 272 seats to form a government. it was announced that narendra modi was to retain the position of prime minister along with the bjp epa 4/50 22 may 2019 palestinian children help their father sort through arugula produce before he heads to sell it at a market, in an impoverished area in beit lahia in the northern gaza strip afp/getty 5/50 21 may 2019 indonesia's incumbent president from the indonesian democratic party of struggle (pdip) joko widodo takes a selfie with local residents after his victory speech following the announcement of the election results at a slum area in jakarta. joko widodo was re-elected after beating his rival, retired general prabowo subianto epa 6/50 20 may 2019 president-elect volodymyr zelensky holding an ancient bulava (historical symbol of the state power) during his inauguration in the ukrainian parliament in kiev. mr zelensky with 73,22 percent of the votes beat out the current president petro poroshenko, who received 24,45 percent of the votes during the second tour of presidential elections in ukraine which was held on 21 april presidential press service/epa 7/50 19 may 2019 sudanese protesters gather for a sit-in outside the military headquarters in khartoum. talks between sudan's ruling military council and protesters are set to resume, army rulers announced, as islamic movements rallied for the inclusion of sharia in the country's roadmap afp/getty 8/50 18 may 2019 james hinchcliffe of canada rolls his car after hitting the wall during qualifications for the indianapolis 500 indycar auto race in indiana, us ap 9/50 17 may 2019 taiwan became first state in asia to legalise same-sex marriage. thousands of gay rights supporters gathered outside parliament in taipei during the debate epa 10/50 16 may 2019 spectators watch as riders take the start of stage six of the 102nd giro d'italia, tour of italy, race, 238kms from cassino to san giovanni rotondo afp/getty 11/50 15 may 2019 buildings in hung hom district are shrouded in coastal fog in hong kong, china. in springtime, hong kong is affected by alternate cold and warm air. as cold air from the north recedes, warm and humid air comes in from the sea and as the water near the coast is still rather cold, the warm and humid air may be cooled sufficiently by the underlying cold water epa 12/50 14 may 2019 an indian worker packs mangos for sale at a wholesale fruit market in jammu, the winter capital of kashmir. mango is regarded as the national fruit of india, pakistan, bangladesh and the philippines. india is one of the leading producers of tropical and subtropical fruits in the world and is said to be the world's largest mango producer epa 13/50 13 may 2019 a nurse carries a newborn baby after a fire broke out on the terrace of a children's hospital building in ahmedabad, india reuters 14/50 12 may 2019 members of the action group extinction rebellion hold banners in front of the eiffel tower after spilling fake blood on the trocadero esplanade during a demonstration to alert on the state of decline of biodiversity, in paris. extinction rebellion is an international movement that uses non-violent civil disobedience to achieve radical change in order to minimise the risk of human extinction and ecological collapse afp/getty 15/50 11 may 2019 an armed police officer greets members of the muslim community in front of al noor mosque as they arrive for the iftar, the evening meal, in christchurch, new zealand. muslims around the world are observing the holiest month of ramadan, fasting from sunrise to sunset for a month. ramadan this year will be slightly sombre for new zealand muslims - especially those in christchurch - in the wake of the mosque terror attacks where 51 people died after a gunman opened fire during friday prayers at linwood and al noor mosques on march 15 getty 16/50 10 may 2019 muslims perform prayers on a road outside a mosque on the first friday of the holy fasting month of ramadan in srinagar reuters 17/50 9 may 2019 german chancellor angela merkel greets people after posing for a family photo during the informal meeting of european union leaders in sibiu, romania reuters 18/50 8 may 2019 smokes rises after a huge explosion near the offices of the attorney general in kabul, afghanistan. two police officials say wednesday's explosion was followed by a gunbattle between militants and security forces ap 19/50 7 may 2019 reuters reporters wa lone and kyaw soe oo wave as they walk to insein prison gate as they were freed, after receiving a presidential pardon in yangon, myanmar reuters 20/50 6 may 2019 students sit in circles as they read the koran on the first day of ramadan at ar-raudhatul hasanah islamic boarding school in medan, north sumatra, indonesia. muslims around the world celebrate the holy month of ramadan by praying during the night time and abstaining from eating, drinking, and sexual acts during the period between sunrise and sunset. ramadan is the ninth month in the islamic calendar and it is believed that the revelation of the first verse in koran was during its last 10 nights epa 21/50 5 may 2019 dutch prime minister mark rutte ignites the liberation fire during the liberation festival in almere, the netherlands. epa 22/50 4 may 2019 demonstrators wearing bees masks and costumes lie on the ground during a demonstration for biodiversity called by the world wide fund for nature (wwf) in paris. afp/getty images 23/50 3 may 2019 caster semenya celebrates after winning the women's 800m at the iaaf diamond league competition in doha afp/getty 24/50 2 may 2019 children chant slogans as they watch a demonstration outside the army headquarters in khartoum. crowds of sudanese protesters began converging in khartoum for a "million-strong" march to press for a civilian administration after talks with military rulers ran into trouble afp/getty 25/50 1 may 2019 people hold blue, white and red smoke bombs as they demonstrate to mark may day in toulouse. france's zero-tolerance approach to protest violence will be tested, when a mix of labour unionists, "yellow vest" demonstrators and hardline hooligans are expected to hit the streets on labour day afp/getty 26/50 opponents to venezuela's president nicolas maduro face off with bolivarian national guards in armored vehicles, loyal to the president, during an attempted military uprising in caracas, venezuela. opposition leader juan guaido took to the streets with a small contingent of heavily armed troops in a call for the military to rise up and oust madur ap 27/50 29 april 2019 in this aereal view officials measure a giant teddy bear measuring more than 20 meters long and 4 tons of weight, which entered the guiness book of world records as the biggest of its kind in xonacatlan, mexico state. afp/getty images 28/50 28 april 2019 competitors ride their bikes along sand dunes during the stage 1 of the 14th edition of titan desert 2019 mountain biking race around merzouga in morocco afp/getty 29/50 27 april 2019 greenpeace activists hold banners reading "climate urgency: think, vote, act" on top of the columbus (colon) monument in barcelona on april 27, 2019 as part of an awareness campaign on the eve of spain's general elections. - spain returns to the polls on april 28 for unpredictable snap elections marked by the resurgence of the far-right after more than four decades on the outer margins of politics. afp/getty 30/50 26 april 2019 a security officer stands guard outside st. anthony's shrine, days after a string of suicide bomb attacks on churches and luxury hotels across the island on easter sunday, in colombo, sri lanka reuters 31/50 25 april 2019 palestinian beekeepers inspect beehives at the honey-bee farm in the east of khan younis town, near the border with israel, southern gaza strip. the beekeepers collect honey and wax from beehives at this time of this year epa 32/50 24 april 2019 north korean leader kim jong-un inspects a russian honor guard after arriving at a railway station in vladivostok, for the summit to be held with russian president vladimir putin epa 33/50 23 april 2019 india's prime minister narendra modi gestures as he holds the granddaughter of india's ruling bharatiya janata party (bjp) president amit shah after he arrives to cast his vote at a polling station during the third phase of general election in ahmedabad reuters 34/50 22 april 2019 a woman living near st anthony's shrine runs for safety with her baby after police found explosive devices in a parked vehicle in colombo, sri lanka. bombings on easter sunday ripped through churches and luxury hotels killing at least 290 people ap 35/50 21 april 2019 police and security personnel stand guard outside the shangri-la hotel in sri lankan capital colombo after a bombing attack; one of eight across the country on easter sunday epa 36/50 20 april 2019 a protester walks amid tear gas deployed by security services on the 23rd week of gilets jaunes protests in paris getty 37/50 19 april 2019 ultra-orthodox jews burn leaven in the mea shearim neighbourhood of jerusalem ahead of the jewish holiday of passover, in jerusalem reuters 38/50 18 april 2019 christian worshippers take part in the procession of the holy thursday, during the catholic washing of the feet ceremony on easter holy week, at the church of the holy sepulcher in jerusalem's old city epa 39/50 17 april 2019 a young girl runs past uwsa military contingents before a parade held to mark the 30th anniversary of wa state in panghsang, also called pang kham of autonomous wa region, north-eastern myanmar. wa declared itself as an independent state on 17 april 1989. although the government of myanmar does not recognize the sovereignty of wa state, myanmar military has adopted a ceasefire with the state since 9 may 1989. wa state has been notorious for drug smuggling in the golden triangle of the last 30 years, although it declared its region a drug-free zone in 2005 epa 40/50 16 april 2019 firefighters spray water as they work to extinguish the fire at notre-dame cathedral in paris. the huge blaze that devastated the cathedral is "under control", the paris fire brigade said early on april 16 after firefighters spent hours battling the flames afp/getty 41/50 15 april 2019 smoke and flames rise during a fire at the landmark notre-dame cathedral in central paris afp/getty 42/50 14 april 2019 indonesian soldiers and police at a general security roll call for the upcoming general elections in jakarta. some 192 million indonesians are set to cast a ballot in the world's third-biggest democracy, with a record 245,000 candidates vying for positions from the presidency and parliamentary seats all the way down to local council jobs afp/getty 43/50 13 april 2019 hindu devotees throw holy flammable powder onto a fire as they perform rituals during gajan festival celebrations in kolkata. the festival falls on the last day of the bengali calendar which also coincides with the birth of lord shiva, according to hindu mythology afp/getty 44/50 12 april 2019 a woman visits the exhibition 'mirrors: in and out of reality' in barcelona, spain. maths, physics and photonics melt in this exhibition presented by cosmocaixa in which visitors can enter a big kaleidoscope to walk through and experience with the effects and particularities of mirrors. the exhibition will be open to public until 6 june 2019 epa 45/50 11 april 2019 voters line up to cast their votes outside a polling station during the first phase of general election in alipurduar district in the eastern state of west bengal, india reuters 46/50 10 april 2019 the first ever photo a black hole, taken using a global network of telescopes, conducted by the event horizon telescope (eht) project, to gain insight into celestial objects with gravitational fields so strong no mater or light can escape event horizon telescope/national science foundation/reuters 47/50 9 april 2019 sudanese protesters chant slogans as they rally in front of the military headquarters in the capital khartoum. sudan's police ordered its forces to avoid intervening against protesters as three western nations threw their weight behind demonstrators' demands for a political transition plan in the country afp/getty 48/50 8 april 2019 german chancellor angela merkel plays with a handball given to her by the german handball federation's president as she received the german national handball team at the chancellery in berlin afp/getty 49/50 7 april 2019 people hold candles as they attend a night vigil and prayer at the amahoro stadium as part of the 25th commemoration of the 1994 genocide, in kigali, rwanda. april 7 begins 100 days of mourning for more than 800,000 people who were slaughtered in a genocide that shocked the world, a quarter of a century on from the day it began afp/getty 50/50 6 april 2019 a portion of the field of 1,500 participants begins the trek to the highest point over the florida keys overseas highway's longest span during the seven mile bridge run saturday. the event features entrants running a course over the convergence of the atlantic ocean and gulf of mexico and helps to raise funds for local youth athletic programs afp/getty

still, france’s higher participation rates mean there is less chance of surprises from the so-called “hidden voters,” like those white, rural voters the us who apparently drove mr trump to victory. turnout in us presidential elections has been below 60 per cent since the 1960s while at least 80 per cent of french have voted over most of that period.

one final advantage french pollsters have over their american colleagues is that french presidential elections are simpler: the candidate with the most votes nationwide wins.

even with the much more complicated electoral college system, us pollsters weren’t really that far off this year, mr jeanbert says. the average of the final polls showed mrs clinton with a nationwide lead of about three points. final results aren’t in but she probably won the popular vote by just under one point, within the margin of error. polls were correct in almost every state. they got pennsylvania, wisconsin, and michigan wrong, but even there final polls showed mrs clinton with only single digit leads.

“it wasn’t so much a problem with the polls, but with analysis of the polls,” mr jeanbert said. “they got the national vote almost perfectly, but were off in two or three states by just several tens of thousands of votes. you just can’t always predict everything.”

bloombergpeople from across france came to the capital to let the president know how they feel about the new tariffs

idir ghanes, 42

unemployed computer technician from paris

facebook twitter pinterest photograph: laura stevens for the observer

we are here to protest against the government because of the rise in taxes [in general], not just petrol taxes, which is the straw that broke the camel’s back. we’ve had enough. we have low salaries and pay too much tax and the combination is creating more and more poverty.

on the other side, there are government ministers and the president with their fabulous salaries. i’m not against the rich, i just want a fairer distribution of wealth in france. this is the first time i’ve been on a protest. i’m unemployed; it’s harder and harder to find a job and, even when you find this famous job and you think your life will improve, the salaries are so low you find you’re in the same situation as before, if not worse.

french 'gilets jaunes' protests turn violent on the streets of paris read more

at the last election, i left the ballot paper blank. i don’t have confidence in any of the political parties and i don’t see that changing until a party emerges that is more interested in the people than in those with huge fortunes. it’s unacceptable that people do not have decent salaries, that at the end of the month, they are in the red and can’t afford to eat.

florence, 55

works for an air freight company outside paris

facebook twitter pinterest photograph: laura stevens for the observer

we tell them our concerns and we elect them, then when they get into power they seem astonished when we come out on the streets like today to protest. it’s as if the protests have just fallen from the sky, when we’ve already told them how we feel.

above all, president macron has not listened to the ordinary french and doesn’t understand the concerns of their daily lives. when he appears on television we have the impression he is uncomfortable with normal people, that there is a certain contempt for us.

i didn’t vote for him. i haven’t voted for a while. when i did, i would describe myself as moderate right, centre right.

bruno binelli, 66

retired carpenter from lyon

facebook twitter pinterest photograph: laura stevens for the observer

we left just after midnight to come here today. there are so many things we are fed up with. we work, we pay taxes, but it’s all too much. to give you an example; my aunt died recently and left €40,000. she worked all her life, she paid her taxes and charges, but the government took 60% of that. does that seem fair?

i’m not in any political party. i often vote front national but i’m not front national. it’s not my mentality and, besides, i’m italian by origin, but i do it out of protest to say things are not good and if you continue like this we will end up with electing someone from the extreme right. but they don’t listen to us. macron listens to nothing.

he’s suddenly concerned about ecology but it’s a lie, it’s a pretext to make us pay more tax. we no longer know what kind of car to buy, petrol, diesel, electric, who knows? i have a little diesel van and i don’t have the money to buy a new one, especially as i’m about to retire. we have the feeling those from the countryside are forgotten.

marie lemoine, 62

school teacher from provins

facebook twitter pinterest photograph: laura stevens for the observer

i came here in a car share to save money and to not pollute the planet even more. we gilets jaunes (yellow vests) represent the poor of france, those they call the sans-dents (toothless), those with modest or low incomes, who are being crushed.

if you live in the countryside you have to have a car to get to work, so we are directly affected when fuel prices go up and up. and when the electricity bill goes up and up, and the gas bill, and the charges and taxes, it’s hard to bear. we feel we are being targeted instead of the airlines, the shipping lines, those companies who pollute more but pay no tax.

personally, i have the means to get by, but i know many people who cannot and i’m here for them. i’m here for my children and grandchildren and all those people left crying by the 15th of the month because they’ve gone into the red.

i’m not right or left, i’m a gilet jaune. we’re not here to make a political party point. most of us are pacifists and don’t want to fight. we are just normal people who are fed up. i voted for mr macron last year, but i feel betrayed and i’m angry. i was wrong.

macron is our louis xvi, and we know what happened to him. he ended up at the guillotine.

marc mouilleseaux, 24



history and geography teacher at the lycée in creil

facebook twitter pinterest photograph: laura stevens for the observer



i’m fortunate as i’m a public servant, so i’m not complaining about pay. i’m here for others in my family who are having difficulties, like my grandmother who has been hit hard by the new tax on pensions. i also know people who wanted to come to the demonstration in paris today to protest about the tax on petrol but can’t because they cannot afford the petrol.

but it’s not just that, it’s an accumulation of things. the fuel tax was just the final straw. i don’t hold out much hope that macron will listen to us and i’m quite resigned to that. all we can do is show that people are angry, that they are not alone and that they can do something about it. i hope there is no violence, but people are angry. i can understand why, for years they have voted for things and nothing has changed for them. they don’t see a way out. but things have to change.

i am a member of debout la france (a rightwing party) so i’m involved in politics. i voted for marine le pen in the second round of the presidential election, but only because, for me, she was the least bad option.the government is bracing for a repeat of last year's may 1st violence, when the government was caught off guard by some 1,200 trouble-makers who ran amok in the capital, vandalising businesses and clashing with police.

read also metro station closures and protest routes - what you need to know about may 1st 2019

castaner said the authorities had found several groups on social media urging protesters to turn paris into "the capital of rioting" on wednesday.

"based on the information we have, 1,000 to 2,000 radical activists, potentially reinforced by individuals coming from abroad, could try to spread lawlessness and violence," he told a press conference.

nearly 200 motorcycle units will be deployed across the capital to respond quickly to flare-ups of violence, and drones will be used to track protesters' movements.

castaner said police would also avail themselves of a new law allowing pre-emptive searches of anyone planning to march, saying a handful of individuals had already been detained on tuesday.

one man was found with a backpack containing "an extendable truncheon, a switchblade and protective gloves," castaner said.

french security forces have already been on high alert for nearly six months over the weekly "yellow vest" demonstrations that have often spiralled into rioting and running battles with police.

many of the violent protesters are anti-capitalist youths dressed in black and wearing face masks, often called "black blocs".

adding to the risks, police worry that yellow vests may turn out for the traditional may day march for workers' rights.

though so far, union leaders have been eclipsed by the grass-roots movement, many of whose leaders have rejected calls to make common cause to secure improved living conditions and spending power.