why did this happen?

please make sure your browser supports javascript and cookies and that you are not blocking them from loading. for more information you can review our terms of service and cookie policy.national

south korea's trade minister has urged japan to accept the world trade organization's decision that upheld seoul's import restrictions on japanese seafood following the 2011 fukushima nuclear disaster, seoul's trade ministry said friday.



during an informal trade ministerial gathering at the wto held in france earlier this week, south korean trade minister yoo myung-hee said the final verdict from the organization's appellate body should be respected, according to the ministry.



yoo claimed it is also inappropriate for japan to continue raising questions against the wto dispute settlement system.







(yonhap)

south korea has been placing import restrictions on 28 kinds of fish caught from eight prefectures near fukushima since september2013 on concerns over their radiation levels after the nuclear power plant accident.in 2015, japan officially lodged a complaint at the wto against south korea's ban and additional testing requirements, with its dispute settlement body initially ruling in favor of japan in 2018.last month, however, the wto appellate body overturned its previous decision, saying the seoul government's measures are not unfair trade restrictions and do not fall into the category of arbitrary discrimination.since the announcement of the final verdict, japan has been calling the decision regrettable and claimed that the wto should go through reforms as its dispute settlement system failed to operate properly.tokyo also continued to ask south korea to lift the import ban through different diplomatic channels, with seoul maintaining its stance to make public health and safety its top priority. (yonhap)korea is under increasing u.s. pressure to take sides in washington's war against china's huawei. the government has so far expressed reluctance to intervene in the affairs of private korean businesses that want to use huawei equipment, but insiders warn that seoul will find it difficult to sit on the fence much longer as u.s. president donald trump tries to bully captive allies into submission.

japan and australia have already joined the boycott. but korea would stand to face massive reprisals from china if it does. china now accounts for a bigger proportion of korea's exports than the u.s., eu and japan combined, buying around us$142.1 billion worth of products from korea in 2017, or 24.8 percent of the country's total exports.

one diplomatic source said, "during a dispute over a terminal high-altitude area defense battery, china picked on the weak link, which was korea" but left japan alone even though it is home to more of the u.s. anti-missile batteries. "this time, china's retaliation could be even worse."

korea has long understood itself as being diplomatically a shrimp among whales, sitting as it did on the eastern frontline of the cold war.

pressure is only expected to grow. u.s. president donald trump is scheduled to visit korea late next month, while president moon jae-in is seeking to meet with chinese president xi jinping around that time as well. seoul needs to cooperate closely with washington to jump-start stalled dialogue with pyongyang, while beijing's role is also crucial in the process.

"the anti-huawei campaign could make things difficult for korea, which needs to bridge differences with the u.s. over denuclearization, while maintaining close ties with china," said nam joo-hong at kyonggi university.

shin beom-chul, a senior researcher at the asan institute for policy studies, added, "the government should have taken a more vigorous position during the thaad boycott by treating it as a security matter, but korea showed signs of wavering. this time it needs a clear set of positions for the huawei dispute and look for ways to dodge pressure from both the u.s. and china."

photo : kbs news

seoul’s foreign ministry has urged the japanese companies implicated in japan’s wartime forced labor to follow the south korean supreme court rulings and pay compensation to the south korean victims.ministry spokesman kim in-cheol said in a briefing on thursday that “there will be no problem” if the japanese firms pay up.the remarks come two days after japan's foreign minister taro kono called on president moon jae-in to take responsibility and respond to the issue.the spokesman was also asked to respond to a report in the japanese daily yomiuri shimbun that seoul is considering establishing a foundation to offer compensation to forced labor victims who are yet to file any indemnity suits if the japanese firms involved in the previous lawsuits follow the south korean court rulings.declining to comment on the report, he said the ministry has prudently dealt with related issues with respect to the supreme court rulings and consideration for the healing of the victims’ pain and trauma as well as future-oriented relations between south korea and japan.