shanghai - as open economic and trade hubs, singapore and shanghai have huge potential for cooperation, the leaders from both sides said at a bilateral meeting on friday (may 24) where five deals to further collaboration were signed.

speaking at the first meeting of the singapore-shanghai comprehensive cooperation council (ssccc) held at the xijiao state guesthouse in shanghai, deputy prime minister heng swee keat said singapore and shanghai have a "complementary relationship".

both have an international outlook, are strategic gateways to their respective regions and have a spirit of openness, he said.

"as the global economic centre of gravity shifts towards asia, it is timely to explore how singapore and shanghai can ride on this wave of growth and deepen our cooperation... the potential for collaboration between shanghai and singapore is huge," said mr heng.

the ssccc, which mr heng co-chairs with shanghai mayor ying yong, is singapore's eighth and newest business council with a provincial-level area in china. it was established about a month ago when prime minister lee hsien loong visited beijing.

the launch of the ssccc on friday also marks a milestone in deepening bilateral ties, said mr heng, as he outlined how relations between both countries have grown.

mr heng said the ssccc will strengthen shanghai's role as the "dragon's head" of the yangtze river delta region, and singapore's position as a node for technology, innovation and enterprise in asia.

related story important for singapore and china to maintain longstanding ties: teo chee hean

shanghai lies at the heart of the yangtze river delta economic zone, an area that encompasses neighbouring jiangsu, zhejiang and anhui provinces.

meanwhile, ssccc co-chair mr ying said china and singapore were close neighbours that have learnt a lot from each other since both sides established diplomatic ties 29 years ago.

"in recent years, shanghai and singapore have become closer and closer. as an important centre for china's reform and opening up, shanghai's cooperation with singapore started very early," he said.

the city is a key financial and business hub in china, and accounts for nearly 14 per cent of singapore's trade with china, reaching us$13.5 billion (s$18.6 billion) last year.

both leaders outlined six areas where they could deepen cooperation, namely, on the belt and road initiative, financial connectivity, technology and innovation, improving the ease of doing business, urban governance and deepening people-to-people exchanges.

"singapore is known for ease of doing business, and therefore is a role model that we always look up to," said mr ying.

during the meeting, both he and mr heng witnessed the signing of five deals between their government agencies and companies in areas including arbitration, financial services and innovation.

the inaugural meeting was attended by officials and business representatives, and discussed issues including the belt and road initiative, financial cooperation, technology and innovation, and the ease of doing business.

"building on the strong foundation of business cooperation between that we already have, we can take singapore-shanghai cooperation to a new level, and take the singapore-china progressive partnership to a new level," said mr heng.

before the ssccc meeting on friday, mr heng also met the shanghai leader along with members of the singapore delegation.

the deputy prime minister is on an eight-day visit to china, his first to the country since he assumed his position earlier this month.shanghai party secretary li qiang says openness and innovation are part of the city's dna.

shanghai’s key word on its march to becoming an innovation center with global influence is “openness.”

around the world, scientific and technological innovation is booming, marked by crossover, cooperation and coordination, and openness is the key factor, shanghai party secretary li qiang told the pujiang innovation forum yesterday, saying openness and innovation are unquestionably encoded in the city’s dna.

li said shanghai will build a more open platform to welcome science talent from around the world to explore cutting-edge technologies and take advantage of global resources.

chen zhengbao

shanghai will also open local science facilities for global use, become immersed in the global innovation network and strive to lead in scientific breakthroughs.

companies from all over the world are welcome to promote major breakthroughs in shanghai in key industries such as integrated circuits, artificial intelligence and biomedicine.

shanghai should grasp the opportunities coming with the pilot program of the science and technology innovation board on the shanghai stock exchange to foster emerging innovation startups and industrial clusters, li said.

jiang xiaowei / shine

and the city is constantly working on measures to ensure a world-class business environment.

wang zhigang, science and technology minister, said china was committed to opening-up and cooperation with other countries.

china will step up efforts to turn beijing and shanghai to innovation hubs by creating better ecosystems for foreign talent as well as improving cooperation in innovation among belt and road initiative countries.

singapore is this year’s country of honor at the pujiang innovation forum.

jiang xiaowei / shine

the country is recognized as a leading example of overcoming limitations such as its small land area and lack of natural resources — including fresh water — to become one of the world’s major financial and shipping centers.

it ranked fifth — ahead of global giants such as the united states, germany and japan — on the global innovation index 2018 published by the world intellectual property organization.

this year marks the 29th anniversary of the establishment of diplomatic relations between china and singapore.

the two countries will seek further cooperation on sustainable development, biomedicine and other fields.

singapore deputy prime minister heng swee keat, who is also the finance minister, said the rapid growth of china and asia means that this region is no longer a passive player on the world stage.

asia hopes to participate in the fourth industrial revolution. the integration of various sciences and technologies is promoting the integration of physics, biology and the digital world, said heng.

he said science and technology have brought many new possibilities on fields such as transport, health, security and sustainable development.

but new science and technology will also bring new challenges. it also affects the social structure as machines replace some manual workers.

and security is also being challenged by the rapid spread of digital technology and social media, spreading misinformation and undermining trust, said heng, adding this needs cross-border cooperation to address.

singapore is also working with china in various fields, from emerging infectious diseases to synthetic biology.









jiang xiaowei / shinepresident donald trump's trade war against china has so far focused on attacking imports. his new front: weaponising american exports.

the trump administration is seeking to choke off beijing's access to key technologies by limiting the sale of vital us components to china's huawei technologies. the us is considering putting at least five chinese surveillance companies on the same blacklist.

the moves are part of a bigger effort by the us to expand and toughen the export control regime that for decades has curbed the sale of defense-related technologies to rogue regimes and strategic rivals. it's a process that has prompted fears from business that as trump's trade war grows into a broader technology-driven conflict with china the us could end up damaging its own economic future.

in closed-door deliberations the administration since last year has been discussing with companies and industry groups how to update and redefine the products on the commerce department's export control list, a process that is expected to gel in the coming weeks.

administration hawks are pushing for broad definitions to restrict exports related to technologies such as artificial intelligence, robotics and 3d printing that they call essential to competitiveness. the new regulations could also limit the ability of companies to hire foreign engineers and scientists to work in affected areas as the knowledge they gain is considered a sensitive "deemed" export.

read: microsoft pulls huawei products from one of its cloud server catalogues

that fits with the trump administration's mantra that economic security is national security. so far the administration has used that to justify tariffs on steel and aluminum and to threaten more import duties on cars and parts from the eu and japan. more broadly it has used economic tools like stricter national-security screening on chinese investments in the us and financial sanctions to pursue other policy goals such as protecting pentagon supply chains and isolating governments in places like iran and venezuela.

'very dangerous'

on thursday, trump described huawei as "very dangerous," even as he said it could be included in some kind of trade deal with china. and in a move that may broaden trump's trade salvos, his administration proposed tariffs on goods from countries found to have undervalued currencies.

china's reaction to the us actions has become increasingly strident.

"all of the chinese people are ready to embark on a new 'long march' journey with greater courage and resilience and will never yield to foreign bullying and assault," state-run xinhua news agency said in a commentary on friday. the us "continues to attack chinese companies not because they have done anything wrong, but because they are too outstanding for the united states to accept."

accusations that huawei is a risk to us national security are "lies to try to mislead the american people," foreign ministry spokesman lu kang said in beijing on friday, when asked about u.s. secretary of state mike pompeo's comments that huawei was deeply tied to the chinese communist party.

read: huawei woes widen as asian carriers begin dropping its handsets

some us businesses fear the export controls more than tariffs. companies like general electric, google and microsoft are worried it could bar them from competing in lucrative markets while reducing america's capacity to innovate.

in a written submission to commerce, microsoft warned that the proposed restrictions risked isolating the us from international research collaborations behind the development of many technologies, and that done wrongly, a new regime "could thwart us interests".

"artificial intelligence is a very broad concept," ge cautioned in its own submission. defined too broadly, export controls could sweep up things like medical imaging where algorithms are being used to scan for diseases and toys like talking teddy bears, it said.

behind the fear expressed by american companies is a concern that a normally balanced debate to update the list of restricted exports could be dragged into a trade war between the world's two biggest economies increasingly being guided by hawks in the administration.

congress last year passed a law pushed by the white house ordering commerce to update its export-control regime to include "emerging" and "foundational" technologies.

the discussions over the changes are ongoing and the administration will likely publish new regulations on emerging technologies in the summer. it'll define "foundational" technologies later this year.

read: south africa part of collateral damage from us-china trade war

the debate over how sweeping export restrictions should be has always been a tug of war between a commerce department in charge of promoting exports and the more hawkish defense department. but people familiar with internal deliberations said that balance has shifted with control of the process increasingly in the hands of hardline trump administration officials pushing for stringent controls.

a commerce spokeswoman declined to address specific questions about the export control review but said the department was working with us businesses, academia and other agencies.

smart dust

the us's export control system has for years targeted things like fissile material, communications and cybersecurity equipment, lasers, and even space vehicles. the 14 categories of emerging technologies listed in a proposed commerce department rule last november included areas like biotechnology, advanced surveillance systems, and robotics including specific things like "smart dust," speck-sized networked sensors.

according to a person briefed on the discussions, the administration has since narrowed its focus to three emerging technologies: artificial intelligence, quantum technologies and sensing advances and technologies like 3d printing.

but the process has also led to fractures within the commerce department and battles between career staff and political appointees, according to people familiar with the deliberations. several officials considered more moderate have either recently left the agency or been accused of foot-dragging and sidelined in the discussions. the political appointees who have seized control of the process are pushing for the new restrictions to be implemented quickly.

read: full-blown trade war quickly shifting from risk to baseline

bill reinsch, who oversaw the us export-control regime in the clinton administration, said striking the right balance to protect national security while not stifling innovation is a hard task.

"it's always tricky to get export controls right. too lax and critical technologies end up in the hands of our adversaries. too strict and we limit our high tech companies' ability to grow and further innovate, and we encourage others to develop their own capabilities in critical sectors," he said.

the actions against huawei illustrate the power of the us export-control regime. they also illustrate the dilemma facing policy makers, reinsch said. huawei has long been the target of concerns from the us intelligence community and was placed on the so-called "entity list'' for allegedly violating us export controls by selling restricted components to iran.

already the moves have had a significant impact on the shares and business models of huawei suppliers in the us like qualcomm and other chipmakers. and that could be just the start.

read: jse tumbles as us-china trade war intensifies

in a report published this month, researchers at the information technology and innovation foundation warned that a crackdown on us tech exports would put as much as $56 billion in exports and 74 000 jobs at risk over five years. they also warned that in trying to force a repatriation of supply chains the trump administration risked undermining the very economic dynamism it's trying to promote.

"a more effective strategy is to say what is the next generation of advanced technologies and what is required for them to be produced in the united states," said stephen ezell, one of the report's authors. the administration "has got to recognise that policies like export controls are not an unalloyed good."the former chief prosecutor of shanghai chen xu was jailed for life in october. photo: xinhuachinese president xi jinping stands by national flags. johannes eisele | afp | getty images

there's more pain ahead for the u.s. and china as their bilateral trade dispute drags on, an expert forecast on tuesday. "it's going to get worse before it gets better," said curtis chin, an asia fellow at the milken institute, a think tank.

talks to end the ongoing trade dispute are believed to have hit a roadblock, and relations between the two economic superpowers deteriorated earlier this month when u.s. president donald trump announced that he would increase tariffs on $200 billion in goods from 10% to 25%. china responded by upping the tariffs on $60 billion of u.s. goods.

if we look at china's behavior, it does so many things to lift up their people, but it is also known as a vindictive nation, (it does) so many things to countries and companies they don't necessarily like. curtis chin asia fellow, milken institute

however, tensions between china and the u.s. — as well as other parts of the world — did not develop just recently and will take time to work through, chin told cnbc's "squawk box." "it's really reflecting an adjustment of china's rise and how china behaves when it's no longer that poor nation of 20, 30 years ago, when maybe some of the things it was doing were more accepted of a developing nation," said chin, who served formerly as u.s. ambassador to the asian development bank.

as one of the world's largest economies now, "some of the things we might have accepted from a poorer nation maybe no longer fit the bill in terms of where china should fit into this region," he said. while many on both sides are likely looking for a face-saving solution to the trade war, there are longstanding concerns that not just the u.s. but many other countries and companies have had about china's actions over the years, he said. "if we look at china's behavior, it does so many things to lift up their people, but it is also known as a vindictive nation, (it does) so many things to countries and companies they don't necessarily like," said chin.

'game of thrones' on a delay

on monday, china's tencent video delayed the broadcast of the "game of thrones" finale, according to an official message published by the online streaming site on monday, prompting uproar among fans of the popular american tv series in the country, spurring speculation that the delay was due to political tensions. "it shows you that china is ramping up its nationalism as it tries to think through how to deal with this u.s.-china back and forth right now," said chin.