a bill banning parents and guardians from physically punishing children is set to pass the diet during the current session, after the ruling and opposition parties agreed on some modifications, lawmakers have said.

the bill is more or less the same as the original one submitted by the government. but it has been modified and will also urge local governments and child welfare centers to offer guidance to parents who have abused children, based on medical and psychological expertise, to prevent the abuse from happening again.

the ruling and opposition parties jointly submitted the modified bill, which passed the lower house committee on welfare issues friday.

the bill is likely to make it through the plenary session of the house of representatives before it is sent to the house of councilors for passage during the current parliamentary session scheduled to end next month.

the move to revise the child abuse prevention law and related legislation follows fatal cases of abuse conducted in the name of disciplining children.

in march last year, 5-year-old yua funato died in tokyo’s meguro ward after leaving desperate pleas for her parents to “forgive” her and stop mistreating her. in january this year, 10-year-old mia kurihara died in chiba prefecture due to suspected physical abuse by her father, which her mother allegedly failed to stop.

the current child abuse prevention law stipulates that assault and lewd acts constitute abuse. but when it comes to disciplining children, it only says people “shall give due consideration to appropriate exercise” of parental authority.

the planned amendment would also seek to strengthen the ability of child welfare centers to “intervene” in abuse cases by separating staff members in charge of taking children into protective custody from those dealing with their guardians.

while there will be no penalties for offenders under the envisioned legislation, experts on child abuse believe the move will serve as a chance for society to think about what is the appropriate way of disciplining children.with an upper house election in july and a tax hike planned for october, murmurs fueled by comments from top ruling party lawmakers that prime minister shinzo abe may call a snap lower house general election this summer have been reverberating through the nation’s political and financial circles.

for the ruling coalition, a snap election would be a major political gamble because it would put its current supermajority of more than two-thirds in both chambers at risk.

but for abe, the risk may be worth the potential reward because there may be no better time for him to call a general election than this summer, given an expected economic slowdown in the fall, cabinet’s high approval ratings and a tight political schedule over the next two years, political observers say.

“with a tax raise in october, the economy might take a downturn, and with that the ldp may fall out of favor with the public,” said hiroshi miura, a political public relations strategist and president of campaign consultancy firm ask co.

echoing many other observers, miura pointed out that it would be difficult to dissolve the lower house and launch a power struggle around the time of the tokyo olympics and paralympics next year.

and after the tokyo games, abe could become a lame-duck leader — his current and, according to party rules, final term as liberal democratic party president is set to end in september 2021.

given those risks and a narrow window of opportunity, abe’s best bet to hedge losses may be by dissolving the diet this summer, miura explained.

abe has twice postponed the second phase of the tax hike, from 8 to 10 percent, right before a major national election. each time abe’s coalition won a landslide victory, another reason that analysts believe he may do the same for a third time.

when asked at a news conference last week whether the submission of a no-confidence motion against abe would be enough to trigger a snap lower house election, chief cabinet secretary yoshihide suga didn’t mince words.

“i would say of course that would be so,” he said, sparking a media frenzy over the fact that a high-ranking member of cabinet touched on the possibility of a double election.

on monday, ldp secretary-general toshihiro nikai further fueled the rumors, telling a news conference that “he feels that there is some momentum” behind calling for a general election, while also claiming that “there is no reason” to call for a double election in the same breath.

still, miura believes a double election is a risky option for abe in terms of revising the constitution because it would threaten the ruling bloc’s supermajority. if abe is really serious about revising the supreme law, it would be a safer bet for him to push for constitutional revision with the supermajority he already has, miura said.

to initiate a constitutional referendum, a necessary step if abe is to achieve his goal of revising the top law to formalize the legal status of the self-defense forces, support from more than two-thirds of members in both chambers is needed.

however, opposition parties are currently unpopular among voters, meaning a snap election would likely favor the ruling bloc. polls by public broadcaster nhk consistently show approval ratings of over 40 percent for the abe administration, reaching as high as 48 percent this month. in contrast, the largest opposition party — the constitutional democratic party of japan — has languished at the 5 percent mark since the beginning of the year. the next largest opposition party, the democratic party for the people, has fared even worse, with approval ratings of just under 1 percent.

lawmakers of the opposition parties have meanwhile been vocal about the need to join forces with one another in time for the upper house elections, with cdp leader yukio edano saying in late april that the opposition needs to “strategically field candidates” so as to maximize the number of votes cast against the ruling bloc.

yet despite the repeated calls for unity, a clear partnership between the opposition parties has yet to materialize with just under two months to go before the upper house elections.

some local media outlets have speculated whether abe, as he did in the past, would try to justify a double election by claiming that the public needs to have a say on whether to postpone the tax hike scheduled for october.

the tax hike is indeed unpopular with the public, with polls conducted by the daily asahi shimbun in mid-may showing that some 54 percent of respondents were against it, with 39 percent for, suggesting that the public would likely welcome another deferral.

however, abe might need to find some pretext to dissolve the chamber other than postponing the tax hike for a third time, according to experts on fiscal policy.

postponing the tax hike this time is “technically difficult,” explained takero doi, a professor at keio university who is well-versed in public finance and taxation.

“note that a new law would have to be enacted to defer the tax hike. it would be difficult to draft a bill and rally support in the few months left before october,” doi explained.

doi also added that purchasing agreements for october onward are being signed under the premise that there will be a tax hike, and it would be difficult to overturn that under those time constraints.

“a double election is possible, but the justification for that most probably won’t be the deferral of the tax hike,” he added.

this time around the tax hike is scheduled to be introduced in the middle of the fiscal year, and the added tax revenue totaling some ¥1.4 trillion that would come in over the six months from october through to march 2020 has already been included in the annual budget and approved by the diet, adding to the difficulty of any postponement.

the government has consistently claimed that nothing short of a financial calamity as devastating as the 2008 global financial crisis, triggered by the collapse of u.s. investment bank lehman brothers, would justify postponing the tax hike yet again.

so with no tangible reason to postpone the tax rise as of yet, abe does not have a clear policy for the public to vote on that can justify the dissolution of the diet, political observers say.

still, abe can come up with “plenty of reasons” to call for a double election, miura said. and with the timing of a vote unlikely to be on his side in the near future, that may be the prime minister’s best bet.foreign minister taro kono on thursday turned up the heat on south korea in a dispute over compensation for wartime labor, but failed to convince seoul to accept tokyo’s request for arbitration.

in a meeting in paris, south korean foreign minister kang kyung-wha only repeated seoul’s intention to review the request, according to a japanese foreign ministry official.

kono told reporters later that south korean president moon jae-in needs to come up with measures necessary to resolve the spat in a responsible manner by the time a group of 20 summit takes place in osaka in late june as seoul “cannot let the situation remain in violation of international law.”

relations between the two countries have shown no signs of improving following a series of court rulings in south korea that ordered japanese companies to compensate for forced labor during japan’s 1910-1945 colonization of the korean peninsula.

in a tense exchange at the outset of their meeting, kono criticized a south korean foreign ministry official for telling reporters there would be “no problem” if japanese companies just complied with court orders to pay compensation.

“this remark shows a lack of understanding of the gravity of the situation. i would like you to see that things like this are complicating our countries’ relations,” kono told kang.

their first face-to-face meeting since february followed tokyo’s request that an arbitration panel involving a third country be established to resolve the dispute.

tokyo maintains that the issue of wartime compensation was resolved by a 1965 treaty that established diplomatic ties between the two countries, under which japan provided south korea with a total of $800 million as “economic cooperation” that consisted of a $300 million grant in economic aid, $200 million in loans and $300 million in loans for private trust. seoul’s annual budget was $350 million at the time.

kang said she hopes that with the beginning of the reiwa era in japan, the two countries can resolve “difficult issues” and take relations in a more positive direction.

she said the two countries should work together “to heal the pains and scars of the victims.”

south korea has yet to say whether it will agree with the request for arbitration, which was made in line with the dispute-settlement procedures agreed to under the treaty.

if seoul rejects the request, kono has said that tokyo will take the issue to the international court of justice.

the two met on the sidelines of a meeting of the oecd.

in late october, south korea’s top court ordered nippon steel corp. to pay compensation to four south koreans for forced labor during japan’s colonial rule. the company was previously called nippon steel & sumitomo metal corp.

other japanese companies have since been hit with similar rulings and had their assets seized.

due to the frosty ties, prime minister shinzo abe may not hold bilateral talks with moon on the periphery of the g20 summit in osaka, government sources have said.

during thursday’s talks with kono, kang refused to lift a ban on seafood from fukushima and seven other japanese prefectures, citing the need to honor the world trade organization’s ruling last month in favor of the restrictions imposed in the wake of the 2011 nuclear disaster.

kono and kang also discussed recent developments concerning north korea, including pyongyang’s testing of short-range ballistic missiles earlier this month, and agreed to continue closely coordinating on the matter.u.s. president donald trump and first lady melania trump arrive at haneda international airport in tokyo on saturday,

by jeff mason

u.s. president donald trump and his wife, melania, landed in japan on saturday on a largely ceremonial visit meant to showcase strong ties with tokyo even as trade tensions loom.

after arriving at haneda airport shortly after 5 p.m., trump headed to the u.s. embassy where he addressed japanese business leaders, including toyota motor corp president akio toyoda and softbank ceo masayoshi son.

"japan has had a substantial edge for many, many years, but that’s ok, maybe that’s why you like us so much," he said.

trump urged the group to increase their investment in the united states while saying japan had a substantial edge on trade that negotiators were trying to even out.

u.s. president donald trump speaks with japanese business leaders at the u.s. embassy on saturday. photo: ap/evan vucci

on sunday, trump and japanese prime minister shinzo abe are expected to play golf in chiba prefecture and attend a sumo match in tokyo. on monday, they will discuss north korea's nuclear and missile programs in addition to trade.

the two men share a warm relationship, which the japanese leader aims to emphasize as washington mulls tariffs on japanese auto exports that the trump administration views as a potential national security threat.

the united states is in the middle of an expensive trade war with china in protest against beijing's treatment of u.s. companies, and tensions with japan and the european union over trade are simmering.

trump and abe are expected to discuss trade during talks on monday, but officials have played down the possibility of a deal during the visit.

trump will become the first foreign leader to be received by new japanese emperor naruhito since he inherited the throne earlier this month.

he made clear during an impromptu news conference on thursday that he was flattered by the invitation.

"prime minister abe said to me, very specifically, 'you are the guest of honor.' there's only one guest of honor ... i'm the guest of honor at the biggest event that they've had in over 200 years," trump said.

"so it's a great thing. and we get along very well with japan. i get along very well with the prime minister."

© (c) copyright thomson reuters 2019.by noriyuki suzuki

as japan's government enjoys sustained support, political circles are abuzz with speculation that prime minister shinzo abe will gamble on calling a lower-house election to coincide with this summer's upper-house race.

the 64-year-old may be tempted into a double election, with his cabinet approval rate above 50 percent according to the latest kyodo news poll. additionally, opposition parties are fractured and a nationwide feel-good factor prevails following the enthronement of japan's new emperor this month.

abe's ruling liberal democratic party secured big wins on the last two double-up occasions, in the 1980s, by fully mobilizing its vote-gathering machines.

however, the clock is ticking for abe as the election for the house of councillors -- held every three years -- is due in a few months, possibly in late july.

a decision may hinge on whether abe can find a legitimate reason to dissolve the more powerful house of representatives for a snap election, which otherwise does not have to be held until 2021.

while abe has repeatedly denied he is thinking about a double poll, his close aides have been elusive.

"we won't oppose if the prime minister decides to do so. we're always prepared (for an election) as if we are in a battlefield," ldp secretary general toshihiro nikai said in a speech in tokyo on wednesday.

however, nikai said it will be "utterly foolish" to seek a public mandate over the planned consumption tax hike in october, and "difficult" to go to the polls in the hope of injecting fresh momentum to realize abe's goal of amending the pacifist constitution.

still, political and economic experts believe those two issues could prompt the prime minister to act.

speculation of a double election emerged in april when koichi hagiuda, the ldp's executive acting secretary general, hinted at a delay in the tax rise -- from 8 percent to 10 percent -- depending on the bank of japan's business sentiment survey for june. he also said the increase would likely require a public mandate.

the government has maintained the tax rise, already delayed twice, will this time go ahead as planned, unless japan's economy suffers a shock on the scale of the global financial crisis triggered by the 2008 collapse of lehman brothers holdings inc.

further postponement is largely seen to be difficult because the extra revenue has been earmarked for expanding childcare support.

but the economy may be turning a corner after experiencing, since december 2012, what is seen as the longest post-world war ii expansion, with an escalating u.s.-china trade war adding to concern.

the economy unexpectedly grew an annualized 2.1 percent in the january to march period, according to government data released monday. but a closer look at preliminary gross domestic product readings revealed weak domestic demand, leaving room for the government to ponder another delay to the tax hike.

"talk of a delay will continue," said hideo kumano, executive chief economist at dai-ichi life research institute, even though the gdp data did not raise a "red flag" over the tax increase.

prime minister since 2012, abe has a track record of weighing the possibility of a simultaneous election in connection with the tax hike, according to sources familiar with the matter.

in 2016, abe pushed back the tax plan to october 2019 from april 2017, citing uncertainty in the global economy. abe at that time considered dissolving the lower house as an upper-house race was approaching, but eventually held back, according to the sources.

a snap election can also serve as a chance to realize his ambition to push ahead with the revision of the constitution, which conservatives often decry as a product of the u.s.-led occupation after japan's defeat in world war ii.

even though abe has repeatedly expressed his desire to put into force a new supreme law by 2020 through rewriting the war-renouncing article 9, parliamentary debate has generated little progress.

the public is divided over the issue, with the latest kyodo news survey this month showing 40.1 percent supporting abe's 2020 constitutional revision goal, and 43.9 percent opposed.

noting that abe -- whose ldp presidency ends in september 2021 -- is running out of time to achieve constitutional amendment, the prime minister may think the "time is ripe" to seek voters' backing for this, said hiroshi hirano, a professor at gakushuin university.

"nobody would say it is not a legitimate reason for holding double elections," said hirano, well-versed in political psychology.

the professor added the ldp and its komeito party coalition ally may not have to be afraid of going to the public on the issue, as opposition parties are "so weak" and "unable to join forces."

"securing two-thirds majorities (in both houses) may be within reach," he said.

amending the constitution requires two-thirds majorities in both houses, and simple-majority support in a national referendum. the ruling coalition holds a two-thirds majority in the lower house, but needs opposition support to reach that threshold in the upper house.

abe has given little inkling of his thinking, but ichiro ozawa, a former ldp lawmaker and one-time power broker in japanese politics, pointed to the likelihood of a double election, in a speech in tokyo on tuesday.

"because we, opposition parties, are so powerless, the master of kantei (the prime minister's office) should be feeling that he can't wait to dissolve the lower house," ozawa, a lower-house member who recently joined the fledgling democratic party for the people, said.

the kyodo news survey showed that, in the upper-house election, 38.2 percent would vote for the ldp in the proportional representation section, against 11.2 percent saying they would side with the main opposition constitutional democratic party of japan.

ozawa also warned at a press conference in iwate prefecture on sunday that abe "takes advantage of anything as a cause" to win elections.

chief cabinet secretary yoshihide suga, abe's right-hand man, sent ripples through political circles this month by saying that opposition parties' possible submission of a no-confidence motion against the cabinet can also prompt abe to call a snap election.

"a single day is enough to create a legitimate cause for a lower-house dissolution," ldp secretary general nikai said wednesday.

© kyodo